<h2 class='ti-2'>THE BOHEMIAN WITNESS</h2>
<p class='paragrafo'>In the country that once formed the kingdom of Bohemia is a wide district known as the Black For est. Its northern parts consist of lofty mountains, whose rough ridges and peaks tower aloft to the height of five thousand feet. Some of these moun tain tops are bleak and barren, and during a great part of the year are covered with snow, which re flects a variety of colors as the frequent changes of light and shade of the sky pass over them. Others are covered with thick woods and forests of pine trees, presenting a bold, wild, and beautiful scene to the eye of the traveller. Ruins of castles, the homes of the nobles of former ages, still stand on many of these heights. In the southern portion of this range, the forest has been long since cleared by the hand of man. On their lovely slopes are pasture grounds and corn fields, orchards and vineyards, with cultivated farms here and there. Rivulets and lakes formed by the waters which flow from the mountains re- fresh the cultivated parts below.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>It is now more than four hundred years since a [35] people sought a refuge in the caves and solitudes of the Black Forest. They were the Waldenses, of whom we heard in a former story. Among these disciples of Christ the devoted Peter Waldo found a home and a grave. And it was in one of their humble villages that John Huss, the Bohemian wit- ness for the truthJ was born. As a witness he bore testimony to the truth at the expense of his life. His history is full of interest. Let us dwell upon it for a short time. John Huss was the son of poor parents, who managed to send him to a public school. As they could not afford to pay any money, the boy acted as servant to one of the masters, who in return kindly lent him books, and helped to advance him in his learning. He was a diligent student, and as he grew up he rose from one step to another, till at length, when only twenty-four years of age, he was made the professor of divinity in the college of Prague. This was a high post for so young a man. At this time he was a Papist : but a nobleman placed in his hands some of the writings of Wycliffe, and advised him to read them. At first he thought them bold and full of danger ; but the more he studied them, the more he saw that they agreed with the word of God. They led him to the Scriptures, where he found many things different from the teachings of the church of Rome.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>One day the archbishop of Prague ordered all the [36] writings of Wjcliffe that could be found in the dis trict of the Black Forest to be collected, and burn ed in the court of his palace. This was done amidst the mockery and songs of the people, who knew that the archbishop was an ignorant man, and sought to burn what he could not refute. In one of their songs they thus derided him : " He to the fire their books consigns, Of which he cannot read two lines," Huss spoke openly against the conduct of the arch- bishop, which led the priests to accuse him to the pope. A summons came for him to appear at Rome; but knowing that he could not safely go in person, he sent a friend thither to defend him. The latter was cast into prison, while Huss was declared to be a heretic. The pope, also, put every place in which he might dwell under an interdict or a curse. But Huss was not to be easily silenced, and he went on to spread the doctrines he had learned from Wycliffe, adding, however, as such witnesses for the truth always have done, that he was ready to give up his opinions if it could be proved from the Scriptures that he was in error. It was in the year 1412 that he made his boldest attack. The sellers of papal indulgences came to the city of Prague. They undertook to sell pardons of sin for money—a shocking delusion, which Huss exposed with great courage. On hearing of his op position, the pope ordered all public worship to [37] cease so long as the Reformer continued in the city of Prague.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>Huss now judged it best to leave the place. But he could not refrain from witnessing against the evils of the times ; and, shut out from the city, ho preached in towns and villages, in the fields, and in the forest, and with such power and success, that, as it commonly happens in such cases, the rage of his enemies helped to the spread of the gospel.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>The disorders in the church of Rome grew worse. There were three persons who strove for the office of pope. The three claimed to be infallible ; each asserted that he could not in any case act wrongly, and at the same time he cursed his rivals. Indeed, the whole church was like a diseased body. The words of the prophet could truly be applied to it ; "The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness in it ; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores : they have not been closed, neither bound up, nor mollified with ointment., , Isaiah i. 5, 6. It was now acknowledged by all parties that something must be done to put an end to such a disgraceful state of afi'airs. Accordingly, in 1414, a council was summoned by the emperor to meet at Constance As the day of meeting drew nigh, there had assembled one of the popes, Sigis mund emperor of G-ermany, thirty-four cardinals, 4* [38] twenty archbishops, one hundred and sixty bishops, two hundred and fifty abbots, four princes, twenty dukes, eighty counts, and more than seven hundred knights and other persons of rank. They had come from almost every known country in the world, and were persons of the greatest note in their age. At the opening of this famous council it was soon found that the pope and emperor were rivals to each other. The Bible teaches us to love one another ; and that ,Hhe fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-sufiFering, gentleness, and meekness.,' But between these two great ones of the earth there was a deadly hatred. The emperor was crafty and de ceitful, and the pope was known to be one of the most openly wicked men of his times. Such were the leaders who were to settle the affairs of the church and the world !</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>Before this council John Huss was called to ap pear. He well knew the power of his enemies, and that when once in their hands they would not allow him to escape. He therefore did not obey the summons until the emperor gave him a mfv conduct that is, a written promise, which was to be a pledge that he should go and return without injury. We shall see how this promise was kept.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>When Huss took leave of his friends, before he departed on his journey, he thus spoke to them: You know that I have taught you no error : con tinue in the truth, and trust in the mercy of God.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>[39] Beware of false teachers. I am going to this great assembly, where the Lord will give me grace to en- dure trials, imprisonment, and, if it be his will, even the most dreadful death. Whatever happens, our joy will be great when we meet in the everlasting mansions/, As he went up to the council, the people of the towns and villages through which he passed came in crowds to meet him ; and in every place a loving welcome was given to him.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>When he arrived at Constance, he sent a message to the pope that he was ready to meet all charges laid against him, saying, that as he had received a mfe conduct from the emperor, he hoped the head of the church would also grant him his protection.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>The answer to this request was soon given ; he was seized, and cast into a dark and filthy dungeon by the side of a river, under the wicked pretence that no faith was to be kept with heretics.,' After he had been examined by the council, he was removed to a castle, where, in the day-time he was secured with chains in the vaults of his prison house ; and at night was fastened by a padlock to a wall. In this sad state he lay for six months.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>Huss was not unprepared for this persecution ; he had made up his mind to suffer for Christ's sake. But in the midst of all his trouble and bondage he found light and comfort from the presence of his Saviour. His accusers tried to raise an uproar, and poured upon him every kind of reproach. They [40] said that he should be burned if he did not yield to the popOj and renounce the doctrines.he had preach ed. His only answer was, " Grod will not permit me to deny his truth/, After some time had passed, John Huss, on his forty-third birthday, stood once more before the council, which had now been sitting for many months. The emperor had come in great state, with his crown on his head, and his sceptre carried before him. Around him stood his princes and nobles. The cardinals, bishops, and others, too, were there to pronounce the sentence of death on the poor [41] prisoner. They placed him on a high stage or plat form, that he might be seen by the whole assembly, and a band of soldiers stood around him. The good man felt his position to be one of great peril ; and though there was no one to stand up for his cause, he knew that his God and Saviour was nigh to hear and help him. Falling on his knees, he prayed for grace that he might be faithful to the end. After his enemies had accused him of heresy, sentence was passed upon him that he should be publicly burned. His only answer was a prayer. 0 Lord God/, he cried, " I beseech thee, for thy mercy's sake, to pardon all my enemies ; for thou knowest that I have been falsely accused, and unjustly con- demned. But do thou forgive them this sin.'', Again his enemies loudly accused him, calling him by the name of Judas, and in other ways casting reproach upon him. To which he meekly replied, I place all my confidence and hope in God my Saviour. I know he will never take from me the cup of salvation, but that by his grace I shall drink it to-day in his kingdom.,' The hearts of these nobles and clergy were closed against all pity for their helpless prisoner. They derided him, placing on his head a paper crown, about two feet high, on which were painted three devils, and in large letters the word, Arch-heretic.,' On seeing it, Huss calmly said, My Lord Jesus bore for me, a poor sinner, a painful crown of thorns.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>[42] and died the shameful death of the cross. There fore, for his sake, I will cheerfully bear this lighter crown. "Now we deliver up your soul to Satan, and to hell/, cried the bishops. But I/, added Huss, commit my soul to my gracious Lord, Jesus Christ." In this manner he was, without any delay, led out to the place of execution, in a meadow in the midst of the gardens outside of the city. Eight hundred soldiers guarded him : a mighty host, in- deed, to take charge of a poor unarmed man ! The crowd of people was so great, that they were obliged to shut the gates of the city, and only to let them out by companies, lest the bridge over which they passed should break down under them.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>The behavior of Huss, on his way to the place of his death, was calm and even joyful. As he passed the archbishop's palace, seeing his enemies burning his books in the great square, he smiled at their vain display of malice. On going a little further, he cried out, 0 Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, have pity upon me;" and he continued to utter similar petitions till he came to the place of execution. The people who listened to him said, " We know not what this man has taught and preached before, but we hear nothing from him now but holy words and Christian prayers.', When he arrived at the spot where he must die, he fell on his knees, lifting up his eyes to heaven, [43] and praying aloud, in language taken from the 31st and 51st Psalms, repeating very solemnly this verse : Into thine hand I commit my spirit : thou hast redeemed me, 0 Lord God of truth/, After a brief pause Huss begun to pray again : "Lord Jesus, I cheerfully suffer this terrible and cruel death, for the sake of thy holy gospel, and the preaching of thy sacred word : do thou forgive my enemies the crime they are committing/, On this the execu tioners made him cease, and compelled him to walk three times rt)und the pile of wood. He then asked that he might speak to his jailers : and when they were come, he said, "I thank you most sincerely for all the kindness you have shown me, for you have behaved to me more as brethren than as keepers.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>Know, also, that my trust in my Saviour is un shaken, for whose sake I willingly suffer this death, being assured I shall be with him this day in Paradise. The executioners then took him, and bound him to a stake with wet ropes. They fixed round his neck a black rusty chain, on which he said, smiling.</p>
<p class='paragrafo'>My dear Master and Saviour was bound for my sake with a harder and heavier chain than this. Why should I, a poor sinful man, be ashamed of thus being bound for his sake?" The wood was put in order, and some bundles of light furze were placed under his feet, with heaps of straw and large wood around him up to his neck. The pile was then [44] lighted, and the flames began to wrap round the body of the martyr. At that moment, the voice of singing was heard. It was poor Huss in the midst of his pains praising Grod. Then several times the cry came from the midst of the fire, " 0 Christ, Son of Grod, have mercy on me." But the wind soon drove the flames into his face, and stopped his voice; still, however, his head and his lips were seen to move, as if in prayer, for a short time, when the Lord ended the sufierings of his faithful servant ; his body fell into the flames, life was gone, and his soul entered on its eternal rest. The ashes of Huss were put into a cart, with the earth on which he had been executed, and the whole thrown into the Rhine, which flowed near, that not a trace of this holy witness for the truth might be left. But, as an elegy composed at this time says ; His ashes will be scattered over every country : no river, no banks will be able to retain them ) and those whom the enemy thought to silence by death, thus sing and publish, in every place, that gospel, which his persecutors thought to suppress. Whilst we shudder at the wickedness of men, as we read this account, let us ever keep in mind that God, who is infinite in wisdom, overlooks and con trols all events. He guides and directs with an un seen hand all human afiairs, and makes all things fulfil his gracious purpose. Out of persecutions [45] and trials he has ever made good to come. The lighting the fires of the martyrs was one of the means of dispersing the darkness of the middle ages y and the courage of these servants of God in the midst of suffering, led the people to inquire after the truth of those principles for which they died.</p>
