<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="dc:title" content="Historical Tales for Young Protestants" />
    <title>THE MONK THAT SHOOK THE WORLD.</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="titulo titulo2" id="ti6">THE MONK THAT SHOOK THE WORLD.</h2>
<p class="paragrafo">In the year 1497 two boys were seen passing
through a small city in Germany. They walked
slowly, and at times stopped before the doors of the houses, and sung carols about the infant Jesus. It was Christmas time, and the weather was cold and
frosty. The evening was drawing on ; and the
bright glare of the fires within the houses of that
old city of Eisenach shone forth through the small windows on the hoar frost without. These poor lads belonged to a school kept by
some monks, who gave their pupils quite as many
blows and angry words as lessons of learning. As
was the custom of the times, they had been sent to beg their bread from street to street, singing as they went along. The better to move the heart
to charity they sang of Him whose lowly birth was
at that seasoii of the year called to mind.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">That day these minstrel boys had met with only frowns and repulses ; and they thought of returning,
cold and hungry as they were to their home. But
there was the house of Conrad Cotta nigh at hand. He was the burgomaster, or chief magistrate, of the
[47]
city : perhaps, if they sang before his door they
might get some help, for his wife Ursula was well known for deeds of kindness. It was their last hope, and so they sang their carol in their sweetest
style. Ursula was very fond of music; and, hearing
the sounds, she stood at the window till the song was finished. The singing of one boy was more
musical than the other. It was the voice of young
Martin Luther which fixed her attention. She had
often listened to it with delight before in the great
church of the city, and now, as she gazed on his
pale, intelligent face, she felt the deepest pity. A
gentle, loving heart had Ursula Cotta. She had
seen the boys driven from three doors, but there awaited them kind words and charity at her dwell ing. When the carol was ended, she made signs
for them to approach. It was not often that they were spoken to in such a gentle manner; and when
she asked Martin from whence he came, and what was his father's name, how great was her delight to find that he was a kinsman of her husband
!</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The boys were soon placed before a cheerful
fire ; and after a good supper they were ready to sing to good Ursula their most favorite carol. When
that was ended, young Martin sang the forty-sixth
Psalm. From that day, Martin became a frequent
visitor at her house. She was as a second mother
to him; and often did he seek to repay her kindness
[48]
by one of his sweetest songs, or by a few strains on
his flute. Five years had passed away, and Martin had be- come a student in a college. He had met with
many kind friends ; and his father too (who had
been a poor woodcutter) by this time was able to
assist him with money. This was a great comfort
to the young man ; he could now pursue his studies with better hope of success. In the college there was a large room, where he spent every moment he
could spare. This room was the library, from the
shelves of which he took down book after book, and
read them with profit and delight. But there was
one large heavy volume he had never yet opened.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">At length he took it from its place, and found it was a Bible printed in the Latin language. He
was now nearly twenty years of age, and had been
brought up almost all his life in schools and colleges,
and this was the first time he had met with the Holy
Scriptures. It is true, he had been told there was
a book called the Bible, but he had never seen a copy of it. With feelings of surprise and interest he turned over the leaves. He had not expected to
findr it so large a volume ; and there were writers in
it whose names or works he had never heard of. Beginning at the first page, he read on till he came
to the history of Hannah and the child-prophet
Samuel. It was to him all new and beautiful, and
full of instruction. As he left the library that night,
[49]
he said to himself, Oh that God would give me
such a book for my own V' That old Bible became
to him more precious than gold, and sweeter than honey to his taste. He turned over its pages with
constant pleasure, as often as he could run into the
library for a few hours. Little did he then think
that his hands would give that holy volume, trans- lated by himself into German, to millions of his countrymen, and to be a blessing for hundreds of years after he was laid in the grave. Three more years passed, and Martin Luther be- came a monk in another convent. The Bible he
had read in the college library had aroused serious thoughts in his mind ; but like the Ethiopian trea- surer, in the eighth chapter of the Acts, he needed
that " some man should guide', him to understand
the Scriptures. He was looking to his prayers and
fastings as the sure way of gaining heaven. He saw
not that a sinner can only be saved through faith in Christ Jesus. He knew not clearly of the love
of God. Every time he heard his holy name, he was pale with terror. The knowledge of God in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and of the grace of the Saviour, were to him hidden truths. His trust was more in saints and angels, in human
merits and tears of penitence, than in the glorious
work of the one Mediator. The monks with whom Martin lived were more
ignorant than himself; he could not therefore be
5*
[50]
taught by them ; besides, they cared more about his doing the work of a servant, that they might live at ease. They made him attend the gates, sweep
the church, and clean the rooms. And, as soon as the young monk had fiijished this labor, they would
say to him, " Go with your bag through the town
that is, in search of food for the convent. When
they found him at his books, they cried aloud,
Come, come; it is not by study, but by begging
corn, eggs, fish, and money, that you benefit the
cloister.', Poor Martin found that by entering a convent he had changed his garments, but not his
heart. He found no peace there. " Oh,,' he said, what will deliver me from my sins, and make me
holy ! How shall I satisfy the justice of God ? How shall I appear before him He almost pined
away from sorrow of heart. God was thus trying
him with small trials that he might the better here after bear great ones. After Martin had been some time in this convent he again met with a copy of that precious book
which formerly so astonished and delighted him
when a student, but it was chained. He could, not
take it to his sleeping cell to read, nor remove it from its place, so he sat by it every time he could
secretly get to the room where it was fixed. Some times he learned by heart long passages from that chained Bible, to repeat to himself when in his cell at night. The more he read, the more light came
[51]
into his mind. He began to see the evil of sin, the wickedness of his own heart, and more than all, the
rich grace and love of Jesus. He also began to detect the follies and corruptions of the church of Rome.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Two events, at this time, led his mind in the
further search after the truth. x\s he sat in the company of some friends, one of them was suddenly
killed. He then said to himself, What would be-
[52]
come of me, if I were thus suddenly called away?',
On his return from a visit to his father, the clouds covered the sky with blackness, and a violent thunderstorm broke over his head. As he hastened
along the road to find a shelter, the lightning
struck the ground near to his feet. He was startled and alarmed, but was unhurt. Stopping on his journey, he fell on his knees, and prayed to God to save him. When he arose, he said, I must be- come holy.'' But he knew not of the work of the Holy Spirit on the heart, leading to a life of faith and holiness. Whatever Martin Luther did to find peace was
still in vain. Those who saw his conduct said he was a devout man ; but he replied, " I am a great sinner : how is it possible for me to satisfy Divine
justice?'' Salvation could not be in himself; " how then," he thought, " can I obtain it !" But
the light of day was now dawning on the darkness
of his mind. The Holy Spirit was convincing him of
sin, and bringing him to feel his need of a Saviour. About this time there came to the convent an
old man named Staupitz. He saw how ill the poor young man looked ; and he asked, " Why are you
so sad, brother Martin ?" " Ah," said Luther, " I do not know what will become of me; it is in vain I make promises to God —sin is ever the strongest."
Oh, my friend," said Staupitz, calhng to mind
[53]
how he had felt, instead of torturing yourself on
account of your sins, cast yourself by faith into the Reedemer's arms—look at the wounds of Jesus
Christ,—to the blood that he has shed for you. God
is not angry with you, it is you who are angry with
God. Listen to the Son of God; he became man to give you the promise of Divine favor. By his
stripes are you healed ; by his blood are your sins cleansed away. Love him who first loved you; and
in order that you may be filled with the love of what is good, you must first be filled with love for God." What good words—what light and peace
did they afi'ord ! Luther listened for his life. There was one part of the Bible he now studied with great diligence and interest. It was the Epistle
of Paul to the Romans. A nd in that he saw clearly the way in which God could be just and the justi fier of the ungodly. From that time he found
peace in believing." Then he was filled with
love, and sought to obey God, not from fear, nor
with the hope of getting to heaven through his own
merits, but from the love which he felt as a child of God to his heavenly Father. Years rolled on, and Luther became a preacher, the head of a college, and a doctor of divinity. As
his influence became great, and still more great, he
made known to others the truths he had found so precious to his own soul. He boldly exposed the
vain teachings of the priests, their craft and evil
[54]
conduct. The fame of his labors soon spread in the
land, and many came to hear the gospel from his
lips. In the churches, the college halls, and the open air, he set forth the only way in which a sin- ner can be saved. In one of his preaching tours, Luther came to a city in which his early friends Conrad and Ursula
Cotta had found a home. They had by this time
lost nearly all their property ; the once rich burgo- master was now a poor man, and the troubles of
life had filled his heart with sorrow. He had been
told that a great preacher was on his way to the
city. They tell me," said Conrad to his wife, " that he talks bravely of free grace—that pardon
for sin is to be had without money and without
price. " That would just do for us,', replied
Ursula; "et us go to the church and hear him.'' The old church that day was well filled, for nobles and merchants, working men and maidens,
had come to listen to the bold preacher. Among
them sat Conrad and Ursula. Strange thoughts and
feelings must have moved them as they listened to the powerful voice of the monk. But when they heard him give out a psalm to be sung—his favor ite forty-sixth psalm
—
" God is our refuge," they called to mind that Christmas evening when
the minstrel boy of Eisenach sang it by their own
fireside.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[55]
The words that were preached sank deep into the
heart of Ursula, and from that hour she was brought
to know the only way in which she could be saved. Nor was this all ; for Martin Luther was now in a
condition to show his gratitude, and repay the kind ness of those who, in the days of his youth, took in to their house a poor friendless boy.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The time at last came when Luther was called forth openly to enter on the blessed Reformation.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The occasion was the opening of a great market
by the church of Rome. Crowds of anxious buy ers : men and women, rich and poor, old and young,
flocked there to spend their money. The dealers were monks, who smiled and joked as they offered
to sell their goods at the cheapest rate. But what
was it they had to sell ? It was, they said, the sal- vation of the soul! These dealers passed through
the country in a gay carriage; three horsemen rode by their side, and servants went before them to make known their approach. As they came near
to a town, the magistrates, priests, nuns, and the
trades, went forth to welcome them with music,
flags, and lighted tapers, amidst the ringing of bells and the shoutings of the people. We may suppose we see them as they reach the market-place. The
three monks seat themselves at a table, and raise a red flag, having on it the pope,s coat of arms. Be fore them is a money-chest ; and now one of them
named Tetzel, begins the sale. Come near," he
[56]
cries aloud, and I will give you indulgences—let- ters duly sealed, by wliich even the sins you here after commit shall be all forgiven you : even repent- ance is not necessary. But more than this; these
letters will not only save the living, but also the
dead. The very moment the money chinks against the bottom of the chest, the soul escapes from pur gatory, * and flies to heaven. Bring your money
;
bring money; bring money/,f The whole account
of this shameful and wicked imposture is almost too shocking for belief. There was one whose spirit was roused, and who
preached and wrote against Tetzel and his traffic. It was Martin Luther, the monk, who was now pre- pared for the contest which he saw before him.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Though he almost stood alone, he resolved, with
God's help, to witness to the truth and expose false- hood. He more than ever attacked the errors of the church of Rome. And what v/as better still, he
clearly and boldly declared the two great Protestant
doctrines—that the Bible, the whole Bible, and
nothing but the Bible, is the rule of our faith ; and
that a man can be justified—pardoned and accepted
of Grod—only by believing in and trusting in the
* Purgatory is said by Roman Catholics to be a place of punishment, where souls are purged, or cleansed by fire, from sin. But this is a vain and wicked deceit : Scripture does not teach us anything about such a
place : it tells us that " the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth," or purgeth,
" from all sin ;" and this is enough ; there is no need of a purgatory. fMerle d'Aubigne's History of the Reformation
[57]
atonement and righteousness of our Lord Jesus
Christ. His success among the people filled his enemies with rage. Tetzel sought to frighten the people by ordering
a large fire to be lighted in the principal square of the city, declaring that he had orders from the pope to imprison or burn all those who dared to op- pose the sale of indulgences. Only wait," said the priests, a fortnight, or at most a month, and
that heretic, Luther, will be burned alive.'' But
God did not let him fall into their power. The preaching of Luther soon found favor with
princes, nobles, learned doctors, and students, as well as large numbers of the common people. As
the priests could not put him down, the pope wrote
against him "2i bull', —or a decree by which he was
given over to persecution in this world and eternal death in the next. Ofi&cers were sent to burn his writings, and to publish the bull in the town where
Luther lived. But the reformer was not less bold than the pope. Placing himself at the head of a crowd of doctors, students, and friends, he went to the market-place. A fire was lighted, and, as the
flames arose, he cast into them a copy of the laws
of the Romish church, and the pope's bull. The
spectators were filled with joy, for they had long
felt the harsh and cruel power of these laws. When
all was burned to ashes, Luther quietly walked
to his home. By this act he made known to 6
[58]
the world that he had for ever separated from the
pope.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">LUTHER BURNING THE POPE'S BULL. Luther was now summoned to appear before a diet, an assembly of princes, nobles, cardinals and bishops,
in the city of Worms, to answer all charges that might be brought against him. "Do not go,,' said
his friends ; your enemies will seize your person, and cast you into prison. " Christ liveth,', replied
Luther; "and I will go to Worms, in spite of all the powers of darkness. Besides, a safe conduct is provided me.'' But,'' urged his friends, was
not a royal letter, with a promise of safe conduct
[59]
given to John Huss, and yet he was betrayed and
burned/, Luther then concluded the debate by
saying, ',1 must make a confession of the truth be fore the diet. I will go, trusting in Christ. I am
bound to stand up in defence of his gospel.', And
he went, and before the princes and priests made a bold and brave confession of the truth. Finding they could not prevail, they commanded
him to depart at once from the town ; but his friends learned that there was a plot laid to arrest him on
the road, though a safe conduct had been given to him. Luther obeyed, and went forth; but as he came near to a forest, five armed men suddenly
opened the door of the carriage in which he rode,
pulled him out, placed him on a horse, and riding
through the forest, came at length to the castle of Wartburg. But this was a friendly capture. It was a plan to save him from the craft and cruelty of his ever-watchful foes. In the castle of Wart-
'burg, which he called his Patmos—his place of ex ile—he lived for ten months. He, however, though
alone, was not idle here. He spent his time in writing books and tracts, and translating the New
Testament into German.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Once more Luther came forth to carry on the work of God in public ; and in spite of the rage of
his enemies, and the threats of the pope, the empe ror, and the diet, he openly exposed the errors of
the church of Rome and called on all men to come
[60]
CASTLE OF WARTBURG.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">out from her, that they might not partake of her
sins.The writings of Luther were now spread far and
wide. Three presses were fully at work in printing
them. His books passed from hand to hand ; they were carried into quiet valleys, and over some of the
[61]
highest mountains. They were read in the palaces of princes, in places of learning, and in the homes
of the poor. Ships carried them over wide seas, and
they were reprinted in Switzerland, France, Eng land, and other lands, until thousands of people were made to rejoice in the good news of salvation.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">It is said that within the space of little more than
four years after publication a traveller purchased some of his works in the far-distant city of Jerusalem ! Even little children shared his love and labors. For them he wrote many sweet little hymns, which
are still sung, like the Divine Songs of the good Dr. Watts, in our land, by thousands of the young in Germany. Popery then received a check which it has never recovered, and a wound from the sword
of God's word of which it must die. Who can tell the full results of the labors of that bold and ear- nest man
—
** The solitary monk that shook the world From Pagan slumber, when the gospel trump, Thundered its challenge from a dauntless lip In peals of truth ?" There is a lesson, among many others, we may
learn from the history of Luther. It is, that we may have much religious knowledge, and yet not know Christ as the Saviour of sinners. Even those
in our days who have had the Bible from their ear liest youth, may yet be strangers to its blessed truths. 6*
[62]
They may "go about to establish their own right eousness thinking that they can become entitled
to heaven by their own worthiness. They understand
not the great doctrine which Luther after a long
struggle was led to receive, and which is revealed
in the word of Grod : Salvation—Salvation by
Christ—and Salvation by Christ alone ; for, Neither is there salvation in any other : for there
is none other name under heaven given among men,
whereby we must be saved." Acts iv. 12.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Have you, dear young reader, felt the evil and
burden of sin ? Do you look by faith to Jesus Christ
that you may be saved ? Are you willing to profess
his name, and labor in his cause, even though you
may suffer reproach and shame for his sake ? Happy
are they who in the morning of their days yield
their hearts to the truth as it is in Jesus.*
* An original Life of Luther, written by the Rev. Dr. Sears for the American Sunday-school Union, will be found one of the most inter- esting and instructive volumes extant. It is enriched by a large number of beautiful engravings, and the initial letter of each chapter, and indeed all the pictorial embellishments are illustrative of some
subject connected with the biography. The work was republished by
the Religious Tract Society of London.</p>


</body>
</html>