<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="dc:title" content="Historical Tales for Young Protestants" />
    <title>THE GUNPOWDER PLOT.</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="titulo titulo2" id="ti12">THE GUNPOWDER PLOT.</h2>
<p class="paragrafo">It was towards the end of the month of October,
1605, that lord Monteagle arrived at his country house in the village of Hoxton, a mile or two
beyond the old walls of London. King James had
issued an order for the parliament to assemble in a few days from this time; and the nobility and
[138]
gentry had arrived from their more distant dwell- ings in the counties, to those they owned in or near
the city of Westminster.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The village of Hoxton in those days was noted
for the mansions of the rich and noble. Fields of corn enclosed by hawthorn hedges, and shady lanes,
whose green banks were adorned in their season with the primrose and daffodil, were seen on every
side. In one direction were the mansions of earls and lords, whose turrets and towers were beheld
from afar. In another appeared groups of pretty
cottage-homes, where latticed porches were adorned
with creeping roses, fragrant jasmine, white elder flowers, and the trailing honeysuckle. While ad- joining the moor (now known as Moorfields) long rows of pollard and chestnut trees lined the grounds,
or shooting-buts, where the London archers at the
close of the day displayed their skill at the long
bow.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Lord Monteagle had i«nvited some friends to supper on Saturday evening, October 26th. As
they sat together in the great oaken hall, just as the evening shades had closed around, a serving man
entered with a letter in his hand. From whence
does it come inquired the lord. The servant could not tell. All he knew was, that as he stood
at the great gate of the house, a tall man, with a broad hat slouched over his face, and a cloak thrown
so as to conceal his form, had suddenly come from
[139]
behind a cluster of treeS; and without speaking a word, had placed the letter in his hand. He had
then (juickly withdrawn, under the shadows of the
twilight.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The lord Monteagle carelessly tossed the letter to a gentleman who was near him, and desired him to read it aloud. The writing was large and cramped
;
it needed care to make out its contents. It spoke of some startling event about to happen. Think not
slightly of this advertisement," said the letter, "but
retire yourself into the country, where you may
expect the event in safety ; for though there be no
appearance of any stir, they shall receive a terrible blow this parliament, yet they shall not see who
hurts them." In earnest words it proceeded
:
This counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and do you no harm, for the danger is passed as soon as you have burnt this
letter.'' The letter had no name to it ; from whom could
it come ? No place or date was marked upon it
;
where and when was it written ? Its words were
dark, strange, and solemn; to what could they
refer? They surely meant more than they ex pressed, and their admonition was not to be
slighted.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Early the next morning, lord Monteagle left Hoxton to meet the earl of Salisbury, the lord high
treasurer of England, to whom the letter was
[140]
shown. They then went together to the king.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The matter seemed of sufficient importance to lead
to the calling of a council of nobles, and before them the strange lines were placed. The king
argued it could not be a public outbreak that was
meant, for the words were— There shall be no
appearance of any stir;', yet it was to be " Si terri- ble blow," though by some invisible agent, for they, "were not to see who should hurt them ;" and the deed was to be quickly done. Now, the king's
father, Darnley, the husband of Mary, queen of
Scots, had been destroyed by gunpowder, and it was
at once concluded that an explosion of that com bustible was intended by the dark words of the
letter. Let us now pass to Enfield Chase, a few miles to the north of Hoxton. The spot at this period of time was wild, lonely, and Avoody, and but little visited except by hunters. An old house stood near
a wood, called White Webbs ; and here, in a small room, had met a band of men to agree upon a dark deed of murder. One w,as named Robert Catesby;
his mind had formed the plot, and he was looked upon by the rest as the leader. The others were named Winter, Digby, Tresham, Rookwood, Keys,
Wright, and Percy. They were all men in the rank
of gentlemen : some were rich, and all were Roman
Catholics. But one of the number, Guy Fawkes,
[141]
was to be the chief agent in the design. He had
been a soldier, and was calm, bold, and desperate.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">He had lived long in other lands, and, a bigot to his religion, he thought it a work of merit to de- stroy the lives of Protestants. These men had often met before ; sometimes in the fields near London, at other times in a little house on the banks of the river Thames, at Erith. Several months had passed away, and they had been
waiting for a time when the nobles of the land,
with the king and young princes, should meet to- gether for business of the State. It was their hor rid intention to blow up the whole into the air, and
thus at a stroke to rid themselves of the chief
friends of the Protestant faith, and prepare the way
for setting up of the papal religion ! What could have brought these men to imagine
and contrive so wicked a plot ? Some of them had
been fined and opposed for their religion 3 but right
views of Christian liberty were not much known
and understood in those days. Yet the injury they
had received, however occasioned or however un justifiable, could never warrant the dreadful revenge
they were about to take. That men of fortune and
education should unite in such a wicked design is truly strange ; but they had long brooded over it, until the sinfulness of the deed was forgotten.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Perhaps they had been made bold to attempt it by a brief, or letter of authority, which the pope of 13
[142]
Rome had sent to England, in which they were told only to obey a popish king, and that it was for the honor of God and the good of their own souls to re sist a Protestant sovereign. Whatever it was that had filled their hearts with thoughts of murder and
treason, they now placed themselves on their knees,
and took a solemn oath not to betray or forsake one
another. Gerard, a priest, performed mass, gave them the sacrament to sustain their courage in the
enterprise, and to impart to the deed the sanction of their false religion.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">As some months had passed since they first con- ceived the wicked plot, Percy had become impatient.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Well, gentlemen,', he said, " shall we always
talk, and never do It was, however, felt by his companions that the time had not yet come. They
must proceed with care, that they might the better make sure of their purpose. They had already hired two houses, one next to the parliament house, and another at a distance, in which they had stored barrels of gunpowder and
large piles of wood. At the former place seven of these men had been digging and working in the hope of getting through the walls to form a mine.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">They had dug deep below the cellar, but the walls of the parliament house were three feet thick, and
resisted all their attempts. It was hard work for those who had been brought up as gentlemen. Guy
Fawkes stood at the door as sentinel. When the
[143]
footsteps of a passenger in the street were heard, a
signal was given, and the digging ceased until the
stranger was out of sight. Thus very slowly they went on. They were all well armed, and were re- solved, should they be discovered, to die rather than
surrender. A store of provisions was obtained : hard eggs, dried meats, and such other food as would keep, were in the vault, that they might
awaken no suspicion from the going in and out to purchase food. Though they had toiled hard and long, the trait- ors made but little way. Again and again they
stopped, as though it were hopeless to proceed. And
then at times they were startled by a noise, as of a
tolling bell, and by other strange sounds, which
seemed to come out of the earth. " Is it a warn ing,' ' they said one to another, " that our own fu- neral bell will shortly toll But they tried to quiet their fears, and sprinkled on the wall some
holy water,'' which they had obtained from
a Papal priest. And as again and again they
imagined they heard the tolling of a bell, they as often resorted to the holy water" for protection
and help. Bold as they were, conscience often spoke and awoke alarm in their breasts. How true
it is, " The wicked flee when no man pursueth : but
the righteous are bold as a lion," Prov. xxviii. 1. A poet says,
" 'Tis conscience that makes cowards of us all."
[144]
There can be no peace found in the way of guilt.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Still, Satan and their own wicked hearts urged the
plotters forward in their dreadful course. One day, while they were working in the mine,
they heard a rumbling noise above them. They
were alarmed—had they been discovered ? No ; it was only a man named Bright, a coal-dealer, who
was shovelling his coals into sacks, to carry them away, as he was about to remove from the
cellar under the parliament house to some other spot. They learned that the cellar he was leaving was to be let. How well timed it seemed, for it was just the spot they wanted. It was exactly beneath the
hall wherein the king would meet the nobility of the land. Percy was quickly sent to hire it, under
the pretence that it was to be used for storing wood
and coals. Into this cellar they brought in small
quantities, and secretly at night, to the extent of
thirty-six barrels of gugapowder. Large stones, blocks of wood, and bars of iron were also brought
hither, and laid among the barrels, to give greater
force to the explosion, and make it more destructive
to human life. Over all was cast a covering of wood.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Everything now seemed ready for the fatal mo ment. What could prevent them doing their deed?</p>

<p class="paragrafo">They had been all faithful one to another; they were united and resolved ; no one had a suspicion of the plot; all matters hitherto se,ed to be
favorable to it.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[145]
GUY FAWKES' CELLAR.-, The conspirators knew that there would be at the opening of the parliament several of their own
friends ; could anything be done to save them ? Keys
wished to give warning to one of the lords not to be present, for he had given food and shelter to his wife and children when once they were in distress. Percy sought to save an earl who was his kinsman.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Tresham wanted to spare two lords who had married
his sisters, and who were strong Papists. Hence
* In laying the foundation for the New Houses of Parliament at Westminster, it was found necessary to remove this cellar, which for many ages had been associated with the dark deeds of Guy Fawkes.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[146]
their meeting at White Webbs to decide this mat ter. Catesby, however, tried to prove to them that most, or all, of the Roman Catholics would be ab sent. " But with all that," said he, rather than
the project shall not take effect, if they were as dear to me as my own son, they also must be blown
up."
But, unknown to the rest, Tresham had already
sent a letter to lord Monteagle. It was that strange
letter which we have seen delivered at the house
at Hoxton by the tall stranger towards the close of the day.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The conspirators had their last meeting in a
retired walk in Lincoln,s Inn Fields, where they
debated on the chance of the plot being known to the government. Some by this time had become
fearful, and said they were all lost men, and had
better save themselves by instant flight. Others
sought to sustain the courage of their companions
;
by assuring them that all was safe and certain, and
so they parted again.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">That evening the lord chamberlain, whose duty
it was to see that all things were ready for the meeting of the king and his lords, came to the parliament house along with lord Monteagle. They
appeared, as if by accident, to descend to the cel lars. As they opened the doors of the one where
the gunpowder was placed, they saw a dark tall man standing near to a pile of wood. It was Guy
[147]
Fawkes, whose nerve and boldness did not even
then forsake him. The lord chamberlain, in an
apparently careless manner, asked who he was. " I am servant to Mr. Percy/ , was the quiet answer, and have the care of his coals.'' " Your master,''
said the chamberlain, ,' has laid in a good stock of
fuel." As the visitors turned themselves to go up
the stairs, Guy Fawkes in bold confidence concludes All is right : still undiscovered." The lord chamberlain reported the results of his search to the king's council. All agreed that the quantity of fuel was much greater than could be wanted by Percy, who had not been known to reside near the spot. Let the cellar be searched again
to-night," was the order given ; and an officer and some guards were to be ready for the purpose. The evening before the meeting of parliament
arrived. Catesby and some of the conspirators had
gone into the country to raise a rebellion as soon as the king and the parliament were blown into the
air. Others had taken their place on the lofty
ground near Highgate, from which place they ob- tained a distant prospect of the roof of the House
of Lords. They were all ready to start at a moment's
notice, to carry out their wretched design in their several ways, as had been arranged. Guy Fawkes
took his place in the cellar, with calm determination. He had received mass at the hands of the priest,
and doubted not of success. His dark lantern, with
[148]
a light in it, was behind the door ; a train of gun powder was carefully laid from the barrels to the entrance ; the slow-burning matches and the touch- wood were at hand. He had a watch, a scarce
article in those days, which was only possessed by
persons of rank and wealth—that he might know
the exact moment when to light the train. A ship
lay not far off in the river, prepared to sail as soon
as the deed was done, to carry him to another land. A horse was saddled to convey him to the ship
;
and, booted and spurred, he awaited the fatal in- stant when the light should be applied to the
train. The clock of Westminster Abbey struck twelve,
and the morning of the 5th of November had begun.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The streets were all silent. Two o,clock soon came
round, and Guy Fawkes softly and slowly opened
the door of the cellar, and stepped out to look about him, and to revive himself with the fresh air. But
he had scarcely placed his feet in the street, when
an officer made a sudden plunge and seized him by
the shoulder. He struggled for a moment to get
back into the cellar, that he might apply a light to the train, and blow himself and the officers of
justice into the air; but others rushed upon him
and cast him on the ground. They soon bound him
hand and foot, and, after a fierce conflict, carried him away to a place of security.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The news rapidly spread through the city that
[149]
king James and his parliament had escaped from
the fearful and wicked plot. Shortly after day break, Guy Fawkes was brought before the lords of the council, confessed to the whole deed so far as himself was concerned, and gloried in it, though he
refused to tell the names of his companions.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Early in the next morning, the prisoner was
traitors' gate, tower of LONDON. conveyed to the Tower of London ; and under the gloomy arch of Traitor's Gate was conveyed to his
cell. After a long trial he was condemned, and at
[150]
the west end of St. PauFs churchyard paid the penalty of his crime by the forfeit of his life. The conspirators stood hour after hour on High gate hill, during the early morning of the 5th of November ; then through the day, expecting to see the dire explosion ; but a messenger brought them
word that Guy Fawkes was arrested. At once they
fled with teiTor and in confusion. Some seized horses
that they found on the road, and passed from place
to place, till they came to Holbeach, a large man sion on the borders of Staffordshire. There they
made a stand, and resolved to fortify the house, and
await their death. As they were getting together
their means of defence, a bag of gunpowder exploded,
burning several of the plotters very severely.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">This seemed to them a judgment from heaven for their wickedness. Catesby himself began to fear that God was angry with them, and he and others confessed that their deeds were cruel and sinful be fore God. In a short time the sheriff of the county, with an armed band, reached the house, and suri'ounded it. In the king's name they summoned the rebels to surrender. A short fight followecf, when one of them was disabled by an arrow from a cross-bow. Two others were soon stretched on the ground in dying agony. Catesby and Percy placed themselves back to back in an attitude of defiance, when one
of the sheriff's men fired at them with a doubly
[151]
loaded musket, and they fell. Catesby crawled into a corner of the room, and died ; the other lingered
till the next day. The rest of the party were soon overpowered, and made prisoners. They were
brought to trial, and in due course were executed
for their treason. All loyal and pious hearts were filled with horror while they rejoiced at the wonderful deliverance which God had wrought. The young daughter of
the king, the princess Elizabeth, only eight years
old, thus wrote to her brother, the youthful prince
of Wales : My dear brother, I doubt not that you
have rendered thanksgiving to our gracious God for the deliverance which he has vouchsafed to us, as I have also done, and still do on my own account
;
but I wish to join your vows to my own, and to say with you, ,If the Lord be for us, who shall be
against us? While he keeps me I will not fear what man can do., Such is the brief record of the Gunpowder
Plot.In the discovery of this popish design we see how true it is that God will bring to light the hidden things of darkness;" for His eyes are in every place, beholding the evil and the good."
Sinners, and all their wicked purposes, are known
to him. We may say in the words of the
psalmist :
—
[152]
" They encourage themselves in an evil matter : They commune of laying snares privily
;
They say, Who shall see them? They search out iniquities ; They accomplish a diligent search: Both the inward thought of every one of them, and the
heart, is deep. But God shall shoot at them with an arrow; Suddenly shall they be wounded. So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon them selves ;
—
And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God." PsA. Ixiv. 5—9.</p>


</body>
</html>