<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="dc:title" content="Historical Tales for Young Protestants" />
    <title>THE TRAGEDY OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S DAY.</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="titulo titulo2" id="ti9">THE TRAGEDY OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S DAY.</h2>
<p class="paragrafo">THE LOUVRE,
In the Sixteenth Century, from an old print. King Charles the Ninth of France, and his chief officers of State, were in solemn debate in the
council chamber of the old palace of the Louvre. They had met on an affair of death ; the death not 9*
[98]
of one, nor of a few, but of thousands of the peace able inhabitants of the land. On the table before them lay a well-written roll of parchment. It was the register of the noblemen
and gentry in France of the reformed or Protestant
faith. A strict inquiry had been made through the
provinces, that it might contain the names of all. And now the council were planning how and when
the deed should be done—a deed which was de- signed to root out, with unsparing hand, the hated Huguenots * from the kingdom. Time and circum stances, it was thought, were favorable. Many of the Protestants had been invited to Paris, under
the pretence of being present at the marriage of king Henry of Navarre with a princess of France.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Feasts and sports had been provided for them, and
everything was done to lull them into a state of
false security.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The young king took up a pen to sign the order
for the slaughter, and, casting his half-closed eyes on the ground, with struggling feelings cried, Since it is to be done, take care that no one es- capes to reproach me.', The time fixed on was St. Bartholomew's Day,
August 24th, 1572 ; the hour, three o'clock in the
* The word Huguenot signifies " associated" or " united together;"
it has nearly the same meaning as brethren," one of the titles of the
first Christians. Some writers, however, assert that it is derived from
the name of the smallest copper coin known in France in the middle
ages, and that it was employed as a term of contempt.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[99]
morning, when their victims would be sleeping in
their beds ; the signal, the tolling of a great bell of one of the churches; the conductor of the murder,
the wicked duke of Guise. The gates were ordered
to be closed, and the walls secured ; lights were to be hung out from the highest points in the city, that the marks secretly placed on the houses of the doomed might be clearly seen. The soldiers and
others were directed to muster shortly after mid night, wearing a piece of white linen on their arms,
a white cross on their caps, and the image of the
virgin Mary around their necks, lest in the confusion
the assassins should be arrayed one against another. Their reward was to be the property of the slain. The armed bands, under the darkness of the
night, and with cautious steps, moved to the places
assigned to them, ready for their work of blood. In the palace of the Louvre all were wakeful. The
king was restless and troubled in his mind. He
seemed to start back at the thought of the guilt about to fall on his soul. He would have recalled the order he had given; but his mother, queen
Catharine, entered his chamber shortly after mid night, to confirm him in the horrid deed. She then
led him to a window, to await the event. And
there, until the city clocks struck two, stood a queen mother, encouraging her royal son to commit many
thousand murders ! It was one of those calm, lovely nights so com-
[100]
monlj enjoyed in France in the early autumn. A
gentle breeze passed over the garden of the Louvre;
and the unnumbered host of stars above seemed, in their soft lustre, to speak only of peace to man. The silence of the night, however, was broken by
the report of a pistol. Charles shook with terror, and cold drops stood upon his brow. The sound was
answered by the toll of the great bell, when suddenly
all the rest of the bells of the churches struck out
the signal. The armed men now sprang from their hiding places, shouting, as they rushed along the
streets, Kill ! Kill ! Death to the Huguenots V
The shrill sounds of the bells, the clatter of arms,
the tramp of the assassins, and the shrieks of the
dying, soon mingled in one long, loud, terrific sound. The duke of Guise, with his party, first rushed
to the house where lay Admiral Coligny, the chief and leader of the Protestants. They found him re- clining on a couch, suffering from a shot m his arm,
received a few days before in a base attempt to murder him. The Admiral was aroused from his slumbers by the noise made in breaking open his door. He partly arose from his couch, and com mitted his soul into the hands of God, when one of the soldiers, preparing to strike with his sword,
cried, Art not thou the Admiral I am,'' he
fearlessly replied ; but, young man, respect these grey hairs, nor stain them with my blood.'' In
another moment, regardless of the appeal, the man
[101]
plunged the sword into his bosom. After receiving the greatest outrages, his body was thrown out of
DEATH OF COLIGNY. the window, at the feet of one of the French princes,
who, spurning it, cried out, Courage, my friends; we have had a lucky beginning ] let us finish in the
[102]
same manner." The headless trunk was then drag ged through the streets of Paris, and afterwards hung up by the feet to the common gallows. The
young king, as though he had now overcome all scruple and tenderness, went to feast his eyes upon
the sight of the body of the man who but a few days
before he had called Man pire !—" My father The admiral's son-in-law, lord Teligni, next re- ceived his death-blow, and fell, repeating with his dying lips the names of his wife and children. Other nobles and attendants, with two young chil- dren, were then slain. After having murdered
every one in this house, the soldiers went forward on their dreadful purpose. And now arose everywhere the dreadful cry, "Kill! Kill V' The officers of the palace, as they
rapidly drove through the streets, cheered on the
soldiers with the cry, "Kill every one of them; it is the order of the king.'' The work of destruction was begun in many parts of the city at the same moment.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Open ! by command of the king," was the loud shout of the murderers at the doors of the houses. The unsuspecting Protestants hastened to obey, and
were at once cut down. Others, as they raised their windows to see who called them at that hour of the
night, were shot. While many, as it was the early morn of the Lord's day, took the tolling of the bells as the call to early prayers. Happy were they who
were surprised in their sleep, and who were smitten
[103]
as they quietly reposed on their beds. Their
sufferings were short, while others had their pangs
prolonged for hours. Tumults and shrieks increased, until they deep ened into one terrible groan. Pursued on all sides, they were tracked like the poor deer, or driven to the slaughter as a flock of sheep. If they sought
refuge in the churches, armed men guarded the
doors. If they fled to the palace, in the hope of moving the heart of the king by their piteous cry
for mercy, the soldiers awaited them with their spears and guns. If they burst open the prison
doors, to conceal themselves among the condemned,
they were from thence drawn out to die. They
fled to the banks of the river, but they were there caught by boat-hooks, and thrust into the water. Death was everywhere—in their beds, on the house tops, on the water, and on the land—in the palace
and in the humblest dwelling. Every spot was a
place of slaughter. The assassins spared not the
aged, nor women, nor the very babes ! With savage
joy they threw the bodies out of the houses, so that there was scarcely a street or lane but was strewn with the dead. The duke Montgomery, with about one hundred
Protestant gentlemen, who lodged without the walls,
hearing of the murders within the city, sought to escape, half naked, on horseback; but they were
overtaken, and all, except about ten of their number,
cut to pieces.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[104]
Thus, from morning to night, on the Lord's day,
this awful slaughter continued, until darkness put an end to the work of blood. The next day it was
carried on again. The soldiers were now joined by
all the ruffians in the city, who, for the sake of plunder, entered every place where any Huguenot
might have hidden himself; and if anyone were
found, he was slain, his body stripped, and then cast into the river. In this way, for five days, the slaughter went on, until thousands had fallen in Paris, by the sword, the spear, and the bullet. Messengers were quickly sent to the various pro- vinces and towns, commanding them to follow the example of Paris, in slaying all of the reformed
Protestant religion.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">At the town of Angers lived a man, beloved for his virtue and learning, named Masson de Rivers, the pastor of the Protestant church. As soon as the
king's messenger arrived in the town, he hastened towards the pastor's house, and found him in the
garden. I am come to kill thee, by the king's
command,', said he, showing his letter of authority.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">De Rivers declared his innocence of any offence; but while he was offering a short prayer to Grod, he was shot through the body.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">At Lyons, when the letters from the court were
brought to Mandelot, (the governor,) he ordered, by
sound of trumpet, that all Protestants should appear
before him. They, without suspecting his design,
obeyed the summons, when they were thrust into
[105]
the city prisons. He then desired the soldiers to destroy them ; but they refused to direct their arms
against men bound and suppliant at their feet. Filled with wrath, the governor hired a number of the vilest men he could find, who, with chopping knives and butchers' axes, fell on the defenceless Huguenots, and, after first mangling their limbs for
sport, put an end to their lives. It is recorded, that
so great was the slaughter, that the warm blood ran from under the gates of the prisons down the streets, until it mingled with the waters of the neighboring
river ! Among those slain in this place were an
aged man, named Francis Collut, and his two sons. When Collut saw the murderers come towards him
with their axes, he piously said to his children, " Often do such sacrifices happen in Christian churches. Believers in all ages have ever been,
and even to the world's end shall be, as sheep among
wolves, and doves among hawks.,' Then, embracing
each other, and commending their spirits to God,
they submitted to the hands of the murderers. They
died in each other's arms, and in this state their bodies were afterwards found. In a few of the towns the governors refused to obey the orders of the king. One, named Ortezto,
nobly replied : — Sire, I have received your letter enjoining the inhabitants of Bayonne to a massacre
of the French Huguenots. Your majesty has many
faithful servants and brave soldiers in this city, but
10
[106]
not one executioner." The conduct of the Roman
Catholic bishop of Bayeux deserves also an honor able record. He not only refused to partake in the
slaughter, but protected and provided places of re- fuge for the defenceless Huguenots. One of the
officers of state, also, ordered his servants to throw
open his gates, as a refuge to the Protestants. He
did not long survive after this time ; and his con stant words were, After such horrors I do not wish to live.,' , When the king was told what had been done, he
pretended great displeasure. He invited the Pro testants who had escaped to the woods and forests to return to their homes. The poor hunted crea tures, hoping that pity might yet find a place in the heart of the king, obeyed the royal command. But
in about two days they were seized, and the hand
of murder again was raised against them. During
this time king Charles was not only a witness of the sad sights from the windows of his palace, but
it is said he even fired on some men who were try ing to escape. The sight of blood had quenched
whatever pity at first he may have felt, and aroused
the worst passions of his heart. " For thirty days together,,' says an account
written the year after the massacre, there was no
end of killing, slaying, and robbing; so that at this day there are thousands of little babes and children, that were well born, now fatherless and motherless,
[107]
and in beggary." De Thou, a Papal historian,
states the number slain throughout France, on this occasion, to have been thirty thousand; other ac- counts give from sixty thousand to one hundred
thousand. The messenger who carried the news to Rome was
rewarded with a thousand crowns. And the pope
joyfully cried aloud, " Good news ! good news V
Guns were fired at the castle of St. Angelo, and bon fires blazed in the public streets. A solemn proces sion was formed of the popes, cardinals, and officers of state, who, in the church of St. Mark, wickedly
offered up thanks to God for the " uprooting of the
heretics.'' To keep up the memory of the event, the pope ordered a medal to be struck. On one side was the portrait of the pope ; on the other, a de- stroying angel holding a cross in one hand, and a sword in the other, with which he is slaying the
Protestants; and on this medal were the words, " Ugonottorum strages," ,Hhe slaughter of the
[108]
Huguenots." Thus has the church of Rome pre- served the evidence of its own crimes. Whatever king Charles of France hoped to gain
by destroj'ing his Protestant subjects, he was miser- ably disappointed. The short remnant of his days was a fulfilment of Scripture : " Whoso rewardeth
evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house."
Prov. xvii. 13. His kingdom was disturbed, the
confidence of his people was lost, and his own
family were in a continual state of strife. Ever after the massacre of St. Bartholomew's day his counte- nance was marked with a settled gloom, or with a
flush he had never before worn, arising from the hauntings of a guilty conscience within. He
gradually sank under a slow internal fever, that wasted his strength. In his last hours he endured
frightful agonies, and he died miserably, at the age
of only twenty-four.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">As we think of this unhappy prince sinking into an early grave, oppressed by the horrors of an
accusing conscience, are we not reminded of the words of Holy Scripture ? The wicked plottetli
against the just ; they have drawn out the sword,
and have bent their bow, to slay such as be of up right conversation. Their sword shall enter into
their own heart, and their bows shall be broken.'' Psa. xxxvii. 12—15. How long shall all the workers of iniquity boast themselves ? They break in pieces thy people,
[109]
0 Lord, and afflict thine heritage. —But the Lord
shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness. Psa. xciv.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">4, 23. Such persecution has often been, in ages past, the lot of the true church of God : but amidst all the cruelties that have raged against it in the world,
God has ever preserved to himself a people. Well
has it been said that the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church. It was so in France ; for
as these pious men were cut off, others arose in their
place. Many of the people, beholding their holy
lives, and the peace with which they met the most
cruel deaths, were led to renounce former errors, and "to inquire after the way of salvation through
the Lord Jesus Christ.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">10*</p>


</body>
</html>