<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="dc:title" content="Historical Tales for Young Protestants" />
    <title>THE FLIGHT OF THE HUGUENOTS.</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="titulo titulo2" id="ti10">THE FLIGHT OF THE HUGUENOTS.</h2>
<p class="paragrafo">About two hundred and fifty years ago, there was great joy in the dwellings of the Protestants in France. The news had spread over the land that the king had, while in the city of Xantes, sent out
a decree in favor of the persecuted. They had
passed many long years of trouble ; their places of worsUp had been broken down ; their ministers sent out of the land, and many of their friends had been
slain. But henceforth they were to have the free exercise of their religion and the rights of citizens. Their sick poor were to be allowed to enter the pub lic hospitals, and other privileges of the kind were
to be fully enjoyed. They were a loyal and thank ful people, and they welcomed these benefits with
gratitude to the king, and with ruany praises to God.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The Protestants were now at liberty to attend to trade, and the care of the land. Their peaceful
and active habits soon made them well known. Xo
looms made finer silk, no ploughs were more busy
in the fields, and no vines were more fruitful than
theirs. They soon became the best workpeople in
[111]
the country. And this was as it should be ; for the
purest faith should always be connected with in- dustry and attention to the duties of life. Henry the Good," as the king was called, had
been once a Protestant; but he changed his religion
to obtain an earthly crown. Many mourned that he should have forgotten the example and counsel
of a pious mother : still he did not quite neglect the friends of his early youth. He knew their worth, and did much to serve them. His merciful conduct did not please the Papists, and one day he was stabbed by a wretched priest while riding in
his carriage in the city of Paris. The Protestants soon found that the next king who came to the throne bore no love towards them ; and they had to
suffer many hardships. At length, Louis the Four teenth revoked the edict given in the city of Nantes,
although it had been declared that it should never be altered. When it suited the purpose of the Pa pists, they did not scruple to break all the laws which showed any kind of favor to the Protestants, even when they had been secured to them by the most solemn oaths and pledges.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">And now, instead of joy, there was only mourn ing and sorrow in many of the castles and cottages of France. The enemies of the truth had obtained
the power they wanted, and they were at liberty to oppress as they pleased. Severe laws were passed,
in the hope of rooting out the reformed religion.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[112]
Heavy fines were laid upon those who did not adorn
their houses on saints' days, and heavy blows if they did not kneel when a Papal procession went
along the streets. They were not allowed to be
doctors, booksellers, printers, or even grocers. No
apprentice could be taught a trade in their shops. If they were heard to sing hymns in public or
private, they were sent to prison ; their psalm book was publicly burned ; and the Bible was taken out
of their houses. Their places of worship were again
broken into and destroye(i ; their ministers were
sent out of the land, or shut up in jail. The sick could only be attended by Papal priests ; and the bodies of those who died were often torn out of
their graves, and left to be devoured by wolves and
vultures. The distress of the Huguenots was at its height,
when they saw their dear children torn from their arms, and carried away to be brought up as Papists.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The joy of watching over them, of hearing their simple little prayers, and of telling them of the
love of Christ in dying on the cross for sinners, was
no more to be known by them. And theirs was the
bitter grief of not knowing whether their beloved
ones were faithful to the truth or had denied it, whether they were suffering torture in a monastery
or nunnery, or laid in the quiet grave. Times of trial show who truly love the Lord
Jesus Christ. It was so now. Many who were
[113]
once known as Protestants forsook the faith of their
fathers. Some were gained over with titles and
honors, others with promises of reward ; many from
fear of a dungeon and death ; and numbers were
bribed with large sums. The common people were
offered a freedom from taxes for two yearS; besides a gift of money, if they would change their religion within one month. Those who would not turn were
to pay double taxes and a fine of ten pounds—
a
large sum in those days. The effect was that many
denied their Lord, some from terror, and others from hope of such a reward as the wicked could
give. Happy did those think themselves who could make their escape to other lands, even though they
left behind them all their worldly goods.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">There were sad sights in those days, and those had hard hearts who did not shed tears at the suf- ferings of the afflicted Christians who had remained
faithful in evil times. One scene was beheld in a
little country town which made many weep. The
good Protestant pastor was to have his limbs broken
upon a wheel—one of the most painful deaths that could be endured. His enemies did not destroy life at once ; they seemed to take delight in adding to
his sufferings. For two days he was left in the
deepest agony on the wheel. In the midst of his pain he thus spoke to those who stood by : Jesus
Christ has satisfied for my sins, and not only for mine, but for the sins of all those who shall go to
[114]
* him by faith, as now I do. I cast myself upon the merits and death of Jesus, and cling to him as my
Saviour and Redeemer. My dear people, receive my last farewell, and know that I preached to you
the pure truths of the gospel—the true way that
leads to heaven. Among others who were faithful were a gentle- man and his wife. A number of soldiers were sent
to their mansion. They rudely burst open the
doors, carried off some of their goods, and sold them. . They then made stables of the beautiful rooms, and
caused their horses to lie upon the rich beds. When
the ruin of the house was at an end, the master of
it went forth with his wife, leading by the hand
four little children under seven years of age. As
they passed out at the doors their persecutors threw
upon them from the windows pitchers of water. TTet and cold, they went forth without a home and with- out food. After a short journey they came to a
friend's house, where they were taken in, and in the
first night of this distress the mother had another
little infant born. But there was to be no shelter allowed for these pious outcasts. A band of soldiers traced them to the spot, and drove them out—with
the baby, only three days old, in its mother's arms I After years of trial, this family found a happy home
in England.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Many an interesting story of the flight of the Huguenots has been preserved. A family who saw
[115]
that there could be no peace in their own land,
planned a way for their escape. They first conceal- ed their money, jewels, and other valuables in quilt ed silk petticoats, secretly worked by the lady and
her daughter, and which they sent to England. The
two eldest sons had already contrived to leave the country ; there remained now the parents, a daughter
aged sixteen, and two little boys of four and six years old. Just as they were all ready to start, the
father was betrayed and carried to prison. Those
he loved hastened to visit him, when he urged them
to flee to a place of safety, in the hope that the time
would come when he should be able to join them
again. His wife, attended by a male servant, went
in disguise to a sea-port, and there arranged for a passage to England for herself and three children. She then concealed herself in a house, while the
servant went back to bring the children. The eld est daughter, dressed as a peasant girl, placed her young brothers each in a pannier or basket, which
was slung across the back of a donkey. She then
well covered over the little boys with fruits and veg etables, and on the top of all some poultry in a basket were placed. The children had been charged,
whatever should happen by the way, on no account
to speak or move. We shall see how bravely these
little ones behaved in their trying condition. The
servant, in the dress of a country farmer, rode first on horseback. He moved in advance, as if he
were unknown to the girl with the donkey ; though
[116]
he took care to keep in sight as she went along the
road. The young refugee daughter traveled at night
;
but as time was precious, the latter part of the journey had to be taken by daylight. Mingled
hope and grief filled her mind, as she either thought
of going to her mother and escaping to a land of
liberty, or of the sorrows of her dear father, left behind in his dreary prison. While on the road
she was alarmed at the sight of a party of horse THE FLIGHT OF THE HUGUENOTS.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">soldiers riding towards her. They fixed their eye upon her, and then at the panniers. " What is in those baskets?', they cried. Before she could give
[117]
an answer, one of them drew his sword, and thrust
it into the pannier in which the younger child was
hid. No cry was heard ; no resistance was made.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The soldiers concluded that all was right, and turn- ing round, galloped quickly down the road. As
soon as they were out of sight the sister seized the
pannier, and threw off the upper part of its contents, expecting to find her little brother killed. As he
lifted up his arms towards his terrified sister, she saw he was covered with blood from a severe cut on
one of them. The child in the hour of danger, shut up in his basket-prison, knew that if he cried, his own life and the lives of his brother and sister would be lost, and he bravely bore the pain and was
silent. The sister bound up the wound as best she
could, and nursed him on the road with the fondest
care, and had the joy of finding that his life was
spared, though he carried a scar from the wound all his days. After a perilous journey the young refugees safe- ly reached the seaside. They secretly got on board
a ship, whose sails were soon spread to the wind ; and in a few days they safely landed in England.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">But the father never followed them. Year after year
passed away, and there was the poor captive, though
not all the time in a dungeon, yet under restraint and unable to join those he loved. They never met
again on earth : may we not believe that, through
11
[118]
the merits of the Saviour, they all had a joyful
meeting before the throne of God in heaven ? Many were the plans of the persecuted Huguenots
for escaping out of their "house of bondage," as it was called. They dared not leave their homes
dressed for a journey, as they would be at once sus- pected, for they were strictly watched. Early in the morning, or late in the evening, they passed
from their doors gaily dressed, with a cane in hand,
as if going out for a short walk, or on a visit to a
friend. Some went forth as hunters, with a dog
running before them, and a gun over their shoulder. A few miles from their homes they changed their clothes—perhaps they put on the disguise of a
miller, with a sack of corn on the back; or of a peasant driving some cattle before them ; or of a porter with a loaded truck going to market. Sometimes a nobleman exchanged clothes with
his servant ; the former waited at table, assisted in the kitchen, cleaned the horses, and slept in a gar ret, while the real serving man lived in the best room of the house, and went to rest on its softest bed. Those who were too poor to adopt these methods, traveled at night—their food was chiefly wild berries gathered by the way; and in the day
they rested in the shelter of woods and caverns, with
a stone for their pillow. The women also passed in disguise, wheeling barrows or carrying a load. On
[119]
their perilous way they were exposed to rain, snow, and cold. Rivers were crossed by swimming;
mountains were climbed, and miry swamps were
passed, until a place of safety was reached. That
refuge attained, their first act was to cast them selves upon their knees, and there to offer thanks
to Grod for delivering them from the ,Hion's mouth." The new home of these poor refugees was mostly
across the sea, in England. As soon as they reached
the coast, they sought some kind ship-captain, who
hid them in his vessel under bales of goods and
heaps of coals, or in empty casks, where they had
only the bung-hole through which to breathe. A
Protestant nobleman, with forty persons, crossed the channel in the depth of winter, in a very small
vessel, hardly large enough to hold them. They
were overtaken by a storm, and were out at sea without food for days, their only support being a
little melted snow, with which they tried to satisfy their burning thirst, until they landed half dead on
the shores of England.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">A husband and his wife tried to escape. They
each took a different road, to avoid suspicion. The man was caught and carried to prison, but the wife reached the English shores, where she anxiously
awaited her husband. To force the poor man to renounce his religion his jailers placed him in a dungeon with an iron floor, and no seat or means of
[120]
support. Under this was a strong fire. The iron
floor was then slowly heated, until the feet of the
prisoner were so fearfully burnt as to make him a
cripple for life. When they grew weary of tor- menting, the poor Huguenot was left to go about
the town on crutches—a misery to himself, and an
object of pity to all beholders. Years passed away, when one day a poor aged
Frenchman was seen hobbling about the streets of London. In broken English he asked the passers- by to tell him where he could find his wife. Some
could not understand his words; and those who
could were yet unable to aid him in his search. All he could tell them was that he was in search of his wife—his Louise." As he crept along one after- noon, with the constant inquiry on his lips, some
one directed him to a coffee-house near Soho Square,
kept by a French refugee. It was the resort of the Huguenots, many of whom by this time had
turned their skill to good account in busy London.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">To this coffee-house the poor cripple made his way;
but no one there knew his wife. " She might be
alive," said they, "or she might be dead.', It seemed as if her name was now unknown on the
earth. In the corner sat a pedlar : he listened to what
was said, but made no reply. Yet were there kind ly thoughts and feelings in his heart. He had come to London to lay in a stock of goods; and
[121]
as, on his return to the country, he would pass through some towns where the French had found
a home, why, thought he, could he not make in- quiry if any one knew of the poor cripple's wife. As he pursued his way from place to place, he
ceased not to feel an interest in the sad story he
had heard in that coffee-house in London. At
length, he came to Canterbury, where he knew
many refugees followed the trades of jewelers and
wax-bleachers. He sought among them for any
one who might answer to the missing wife. The
strange tale soon got spread about, and it led to a 11*
[122]
delightful result. For there, indeed, lived the poor woman, getting her living by needlework. She
had long given up the hope of seeing her dear hus- band again : surely he was a galley-slave, or in some
dungeon, or dead. But now the pedlar's story reach- ed her ears, and she set off without delay for Lon don. There she soon found her aged afflicted hus- band, who had been reduced to the lowest poverty,
and was in utter despair of finding her he had so earnestly sought. It was a meeting of mingled joy
and sorrow. She rejoiced to behold again the com panion of her youth, and the professor of the same
faith ; but tears flowed fast as she beheld his help less state. After a short stay, they set out for Can terbury, where the faithful wife worked hard, and
nursed, and cherished the cripple-husband whom
she had often mourned as dead. Another Huguenot couple resolved to flee. They
could disguise themselves, but what was to be done
with their baby ? If they were seen passing through
the gates of the town in which they lived, with a
child, they would at once be seized. After many
thoughts, their plan was to wrap the infant as a
formless bundle, to one end of which they attached
a string. They then took advantage of a very deep
gutter, like that which runs in the middle of so many old streets in French towns. When night came, the gates of the place were, as usual, closed
fast. Now was the time. The living bundle was
[123]
duly placed in the gutter, near to one of the gates,
with many a prayer that the sleeping draught
would not be too strong, and yet so strong as to keep the child asleep. The parents knocked at the
gate, as though they wished to pass into the
country. The guard came out of his little house,
and well surveyed them. He knew they were Huguenots ; but where, thought he, is their child ? Will a Huguenot mother desert her tender babe,
that she may escape? Will she leave it to be
brought up as a Papist? Not she; so then the guard concluded that they were not about to flee
—
at least this time. He turned the heavy lock ; they
passed out ; and now again securing the gates, he
slowly turned into his guardroom. " Hush ! quick ! quick ! catch the end of the
string under the gate: There ! it is caught. Now,
gently draw it along in the shadow.,' Blessed be
the name of God, the babe is through. It has not
cried. The sleeping draught has done its work.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The infant is once again in its mother's arms; and
the parents, with their dear treasure, are on their way to the sea-shore. That couple, with their babe,
in a few days were safely in England, and their descendants may read this story on the page that recounts the adventures of their Huguenot fore- fathers. The new home of these poor refugees, as we
have said, was mostly in England. There were
[124]
many of all ranks in this land wlio felt for their sorrows ; they opened their houses to receive them,
and their purses to aid them in their need. But
the refugees came not to eat the bread of idleness. They carried with them their skill and their trades. Thousands made their way to London, and formed
almost a new town in the part of the outskirts known as Spitalfields ; and others founded a colony
at St. Giles-in-the-Fields. Some went to Norwich,
Coventry, Canterbury, Edinburgh, and other places.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Among the refugees in England were a duke, a duchess, several generals, counts, marquises, vis- counts, barons, judges, noble ladies, men of learning,
ministers, merchants, and captains.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">There were also farmers and artisans. They
brought with them the useful arts of life as well as the example of their piety. ' The weaving of silk was their chief employment ; and soon their busy
looms were heard in many a dwelling. Even
noblemen became master weavers ; for though, in some instances, they had saved enough out of the wreck of their estates to provide for themselves,
they engaged in trade to help their companions in
tribulation." Before this time, the people of Eng land had to send abroad for many valuable articles; but now they could obtain them home-made. The
French introduced into their adopted country the
art of calico-printing and wax-bleaching ; the weav ing of velvet, silk stockings, crapes, bombazines,
[125]
gauzes, damask table-linen, cambric, and other
things of the kind. Besides, they brought with
them improved ways of manufacturing ribbons,
tapestry, baize, sail-cloth, and sacking ; new modes
also of dyeing, and making hats, pins, needles,
watches, lace, and looking-glasses. Some were
skilful as artists, and some in science. The first person who contrived a machine in England moved
by steam was Savary ; the best maker of telescopes was Dolland ; and the most famous biscuit-baker was Le Man, all belonging to refugee families. In these ways they repaid England for its protection ; and to the present day the people of that country gather
the fruits of the toils, losses, and sufferings, the
skill and the industry of those driven from their native land, for conscience' sake, by the base and
and cruel act which revoked the Edict of Nantes.</p>


</body>
</html>