<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="dc:title" content="Historical Tales for Young Protestants" />
    <title>THE PROTESTANTS.</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="titulo titulo2" id="ti8">THE PROTESTANTS.</h2>
<p class="paragrafo">There have been Protestants from the first : those who have ,protested against the errors of the age. They have been mostly a "little flock," often driven into the caves of the mountains, or hidden in forests and sheltered valleys, yet have they not failed to bear a testimony for God and his truth. Among these pious worthies were the Waldenses. In very early times the glad news of redeeming love was carried to them, and it took deep root in their hearts. It met a welcome, and was believed, loved, and cherished. In their lowly valleys they long kept the faith," protected by their humble and obscure condition ; while the nations around them were sunk in the greatest errors. The range of mountains known as the Alps lies north of Italy and east of France. Towards the south side of this range is the country of Piedmont, and here, on a small tract of land, still live the "men of the valleys,,' the descendants of the early Waldenses, the " martyr people,,' as they were called—the Protestants of their times. Their homes sti,etch up the Alps, and down into [85] the plain below, and are formed into little hamlets and villages. Those by the plain are very pleasant, with meadows and vineyards, wheat and rye fields, and gardens. Mulberry trees fringe the road-sides, giving food for the vast multitudes of silkworms, which spin silk for the people to trade in. Higher up, the way winds among huge frowning cliffs, by the sides of which torrents dash down to the plains below. Here and there are little valleys open to the sun, edged by forests of firs, warm and green, where a cluster of cottages lie nestled close together, sur- rounded by patches of potatoes and corn, while herds of cattle and flocks of goats are grazing on the grassy spots of the mountain side. Still higher up, the trees dwindle to dwarfs ; deep snows cover the peaks, and masses of ice, which sometimes tumble down from the heights, destroying everything in their way. Here everything looks wild and dreary, and you wonder how any one can live there. In this diversified region of snow and sunshine, of peak and hollow, live the successors of the martyr people, numbering now, perhaps, about twenty-two thousand souls. Away up in their mountain retreats the Walden ses never fell into the same corrupt way of thinking of the gospel as nearly all the rest of Europe had. No ; they, to a great extent, held fast to the pure word of God, They said, Men ought not to go to Rome for the pardon of their sins, nor seek to 8* [86] saints and relics for help. "The church," they declared, " is founded, not on St. Peter, much less on the pope ; but upon Christ and his doctrines as taught in the Bible.'' They maintained that it was wicked idolatry to worship images, or so much as to have them in the churches. Behold, how they protested against Popery ! They were real Pro testants long before Luther's reformation, or before the name Protestant" was given to Christians. For several hundred years nobody thought of harming these lowly people in their mountain val leys. They had no riches to tempt the great and the warlike to invade their homes. It was almost as though they were forgotten by the rest of the world. And thus shielded from many of the evils which came upon others, they were in a great measure faithful to the truth as it is in Christ. As they grew in love to the Saviour, they wanted others to love him also, and to enjoy the light and comfort which he can give to the soul. So poor little Al- pine churches sent missionaries out, two by two, to France, to Germany, to Italy, and all about. Is it not beautiful to see how the love of Christ moves the heart ? It not only makes us desire to be good, but to do good. It leads us to deny ourselves, and seek to relieve the sorrows of others. That is just what Jesus did. He came into the world to seek and to save the lost. "He came not to be ministered unto, but to minister." He was as a servant for the [87] good of others. So will his true followers, when filled with his love, strive to benefit all on whom they can exert an influence. Not only did these children of the Alps send missionaries forth, but colporteurs, or book-hawkers also. Thus did they employ these agents more than four hundred years ago—pious pedlars, who, with their goods, carried leaves of the Bible, and icritten tracts—for this was before the invention of printing—and left them with those found willing to receive them. In ways like these, Bible piety was kept alive in many hearts and homes and hamlets, while the darkness of Popery rested on the nominally Christian world. These Waldenses, then, were among the first Pro testants in the church. But we will now pass to the time when the name Protestant was to be distinctly adopted by those who refused to submit to the church of Rome.</p>
<p class="paragrafo">The case was similar to that of which we read in the New Testament, when all who were the follow ers of Jesus were Christians, before they were so called in the city of Antioch (Acts xi. 26 ;) but after that time they went forth glorying in the name of their Divine Master. So from the time of which we now speak men began to rejoice in the name of Protestants. Spire is an ancient city on the banks of the river Rhine, in Germany. In the days of Luther it was a place of great trade and wealth. Lofty towers [88] lined its strong walls ; noble buildings adorned its streets ; and pleasant walks were formed on the out side of the city. This place was selected by Charles the Fifth, the emperor of Germany, to hold a "diet', or assembly, to consult on the state of the country and of the Roman Catholic church. This emperor, his brother Ferdinand, (king of Spain,) and the pope, were the three great enemies of the Reforma tion. They were bold, rich, and powerful, and were CITY OF SPIRE. quite resolved to put an end to the "new doctrines,'' as they called them ; though, indeed, they were the old doctrines preached by the Apostles. In the [89] hope to stop their progress, they called this great assembly in this famous place of resort. Before the day came for the diet to commence business, the Roman Catholic princes and bishops entered the city of Spire with great pomp aod mili- tary array, as if they were going to war. One or two of the princes who favored the Reformation also drew nigh at the head of their horsemen; while others were attended with only a few learned and pious men, whose calm and cheerful looks showed that they were not ashamed of the cause they were about to plead. Besides these, there were deputies or persons acting on the part of several of the "free cities'' of Germany. Never before was there a great er gathering for such a purpose in any country of Europe.</p>
<p class="paragrafo">The Protestant princes wore these letters braided on their right sleeves, v. D. M. i. being the first letters of the Latin words Verhum Domini manet in jEternum, (" The word of the Lord en- dureth for ever,'' 1 Peter i. 25.) The same letters were placed over the doors of the hotels in Spire where they lodged. Thus the Bible was the ensign under which they stood arrayed.</p>
<p class="paragrafo">It had boen proposed that the princes of the German empire should be at liberty to make such reforms in their churches as they saw necessary, with the permission of the emperor. This the pope did not like at all. Liberty of conscience he strongly opposed. People must not think for [90] themselves in matters of religion," he said, "or make what reforms they please ; but they must think and act according to what the church of Rome teaches, and that church alone." They were resolved to put down all religious liberty. They first sent down an order that the gospel should not be preached in the city of Spire by the reformers ; but the princes, on their arrival, urged their right to a place of worship for their use. Their demand was sternly denied. The princes then ordered their preachers to conduct divine service in the halls of their palaces and hotels ; and such was the thirst of the people to hear the word, that eight thousand of them were present one Lord's day during the morning and evening worship of the evangelical princes. While the papal worship was carried on in the beautiful cathedral of Spire, before a small number of people, crowds from town and country filled the places where the word of God was preached by the reformed pastors. The princes thus boldly made known their faith. They said they would give up their kingdoms and their lives rather than submit to what they believed was wrong. We will,'' said they, obey the emperor in everything that may maintain peace and the honor of God; but we cannot submit to give up the truths of the Bible, nor the simple worship of God." The princes were out-voted by the diet, but not cast down. Let us reject the decrees which re- fuse us redress," they cried; in matters of con- [91] science we must endure everything, sacrifice every- thing—our crowns, our lives—rather than give up the word of God." But they soon found that the diet spurned their claims, and would not listen to their words. Had not, then, the time come for them to make a solemn protest against the false and shameful conduct of their opposers? Yes; they all saw it was the hour to make a brave stand for the truth ; and hand to hand, and heart to heart, they went forward in the course of duty.</p>
<p class="paragrafo">THE PROTEST AT SPIRE. It was on the 25th of April, 1529, that they met in a little room on the ground floor of a minister's [92] house in St. John's Lane, in the city of Spire— a room which is still shown to the traveller. And there, with prayerful and brave hearts, and steady hands, they all stood forward. There were John the Constant, of Saxony, Philip of Hesse, George of Brandenburg, and other noble princes, together with deputies from several chief cities. One by one they signed their names to a paper in which they appealed against the violent acts and the errors of the followers of the pope. As they placed their seals to the Protest, they said, We appeal, for ourselves, for our subjects, and for all who re- ceive, or who shall hereafter receive, the word of God.'' Two lawyers of the city then added their names as witnesses, and the deed was done. They had now cut the cords that had bound them to the church of Rome, and were free. It has been said that the upper chamber in Jeru salem, in which the disciples met and continued with one accord in prayer, and that lower chamber in the city of Spire, were " the two cradles of the church." The princes and other reformers returned to the diet, and John the Constant, elector of Saxony, who had first signed the paper, stood before king Ferdinand and the bishops, with the Protest in his hand. And thus he read : — We are resolved, with the grace of God, to maintain the pure preaching of his holy word, such as is contained in the [93] books of the Old and New Testaments, without adding anything thereto that may be contrary to it. This word is the only truth ; it is the sure rule of all doctrine and of all life, and can never fail or de- ceive us. He who builds on this foundation shall stand against all the powers of hell, whilst all the human vanities that are set up against it shall fall before the face of God.,' "We earnestly entreat you,,' they went on to say, to weigh carefully our wrongs and our motives. If you do not yield to our request, we Protest before G-od, our only Creator, Preserver, and Redeemer and Saviour, and who will one day be our Judge, as well as before all men and all creatures, that we, for us and our people, neither consent nor adhere in any manner to the proposed decree'' (which had been made to deprive them of their Christian liberty) "in anything that is con trary to God, to his holy word, to our right con science, and to the salvation of souls.'' King Perdinand wished to return the Protest to those who brought it ) but the princes would not take it back. They placed it on the table, and then respectfully quitted the room. Thus did these bold men act and speak. They did not stand as though they were perplexed or alarmed; but, with the word of God in one hand, and the Protest in the other, they lifted up their heads in courage and hope. 9 [94] This appeal they also sent to the emperor Charles. When the messengers stood before him, he looked upon them in his pride, and speedily sent them from his presence till he should give his decision. After keeping them waiting for a month, he had them put under arrest, and threatened them with death if they left the town or wrote to their friends at Spire.</p>
<p class="paragrafo">It was soon found by the reformers that all at- tempts to have the free use of the word of God and liberty of conscience were at an end ; and they pre- pared, in prayer and faith, for the struggle they saw before them. They left the city of Spire re- solved to be Protestants, and to hold fast by the Bible, and the Bible only, as their rule of faith, and their guide to heaven. And from that day to the present the conflict has continued between truth and error—the doctrines of the gospel and the vain devices of popery. Nor will it cease until truth shall prevail, and ,Uhe kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ.', Until that happy time shall come, the young must be taught against what they protest, and why they do so, that they may not bear the name of Protestant in vain. Like the reformers at Spire, they must Protest against all attempts to deprive them of the free use of the Bible; because our Saviour directed the people to search the Scriptures" (John v. 89;) [95] and of Timothy it was said, " From a child thou hast known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.', (2 Tim iii. 15.) They must be Bible Christians, in distinction from those whose faith rests on the word and traditions of men. They must Protest against making the apostle Peter the foundation of the church (though he was one of the chief of the disciples ;) because it is written, Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Christ Jesus. 1 Cor.</p>
<p class="paragrafo">iii. 11. They must Protest against paying Divine worship to the virgin Mary (though she was " blessed among women ;',) because it is declared, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.'' Matt. iv. 10. They must Protest against praying to saints and angels as mediators; because it is written, "If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous'' (1 John ii. 1 ;) and there is but one Mediator." 1 Tim. ii. 5. They must Protest against the Papal doctrine of the mass, or the celebration of the Lord's supper as a sacrifice for sin, when a piece of wafer is called the host, or victim," and is worshipped; because such conduct is opposed to the Scripture doctrine "of one sacrifice for sin," which Christ oflered once for all." Heb. x. 10, 12.</p>
<p class="paragrafo">[96] They must Protest against the priests withhold- ing the wine from the people at the Lord,s supper; because our Lord said, "Drink ye all of it." Matt, xxvi. 27. They must Protest against the Romish doctrine of human merit ; because the Scriptures teach us, " We are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus', (Rom. iii. 24;) and "if by grace, then is it no more of works. Rom. xi. 6. They must Protest against the vain doctrine of purgatory, or a state in another world in which the remains of sin are cleansed by fire; because it is written, " The blood of Jesus Christ his Son clean- seth us from all sin.', 1 John i. 7. They must Protest against these, and all other errors of the church of Rome; because they* are contrary to the Holy Scriptures, which God has given to us to be the sufficient and only rule of faith and practice. Let the young, then, well con sider why they are called Protestants; and let them be earnest to receive into their hearts those great truths which the apostles and reformers preached, and through the reception of which alone, by the grace of the Holy Spirit leading them to a true faith in Jesus Christ, they can be saved.</p>

</body>
</html>