<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="UTF-8" />
<meta name="dc:title" content="Historical Tales for Young Protestants" />
<title>THE STORY OF THE ENGLISH BIBLE.</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="titulo titulo2" id="ti14">THE STORY OF THE ENGLISH BIBLE.</h2>
<p class="paragrafo">The Sabbath sun rises and sets, bringing to our
hearts and homes unnumbered blessings. The
gospel is preached to thousands; and hosts of
children, in the quiet of their own dwellings, or amid the cheerful hum of the Sunday-school, read
the holy book of God. We may apply to these times the prophecy of old : They shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig-tree; and
none shall make them afraid,', Micah iv. 4. But
how seldom do we remember the wearisome labors, and the long and deadly struggles of holy men in former ages, in their efforts that the people might
have, in all its freeness and fullness, a cheap and
open Bible. We will go back in our thoughts to other times,
and, with grateful feelings, trace the steps which led
to this blessed result. It was in the year 1428, or thereabouts, a man,
named Lawrence Coster, was seen walking on the
outside of the walls of the old city of Haarlem, in Holland. His pace was slow, and it was evident
[168]
that his mind was engaged in deep thought. As he
walked, he came to a grove, and there with his knife he cut a piece of bark from a tree. He paced
up and down beneath the shade of the grove, and
amused himself with carving the bark. Now and
then he paused, and then again went on with his work. As he turned to go home he found he had
cut the shape of a number of raised letters on the
face of the bark. That evening he sat down in his house, and carved more letters on other pieces of wood. When he had done several in this way he
fastened them together by a piece of string. Some
ink was then made thick, and rubbing the faces of the letters with it, he pressed a sheet of paper
against them. He gazed on what he had done with
surprise, and well he might. To him it was the
first idea of printing. He had made the earliest attempt, in Europe at least, of impressing on paper
the thoughts of the mind. There was hope for the world in those pieces of bark tied together by a
string.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">A few years passed away, and anothej man, of the name of Gottenberg, was busy in a small work shop in the German city of Mentz, cutting letters. This time, however, they were not made of wood or bark, but of metal. Nor were several carved on one
piece of wood, each was a separate type, or letter. Something of a machine, too, called a press, had
been formed, and with these metal types he soon set
[169]
about printing books. The volume that was print- ed was a Latin Bible. It was not finished, as it would be now, in a few weeks ; but nearly eight years passed before it came from the workmen's
hands. Every one who saw it was astonished. Copy after copy was sent forth, all exactly alike, and it seemed as if they had been produced by
miracle. Who could write them so fast? How
could they be made so rapidly ? Why was it that they all appeared alike—page for page, line for line, the same to the smallest dot ? Men knew but little of this infant art, nor did they foresee, in its first efibrts, the earnest of the richest blessings to all mankind. Surely, it was well that the first volume
thus printed was the best book—that it was God's
book. It was the pledge of the great things to be done by the discovery of the art of printing, in giving the Holy Scriptures to every nation on the
earth. Let us now trace another step in the course that
led to a free and full Bible for the people.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">England was to receive the benefit of the new
art, in conveying to it the Scriptures in the lan- guage of the people, through the means of William
Tyndale. This worthy man was born on the bor- ders of Wales, of parents who were in a humble con dition of life. How little did they think, as they
looked on him in his infancy, that he would become
15*
[170]
one of the best friends of his country, and that his name would be held by many in more honor than
any conqueror who ever lived ! In the course of time, William Tyndale became a poor priest of one of the colleges in Oxford. As he
sat one day with some fellow priests, he spoke of the value of the word of God, when they mockingly
said, We are better without Grod's law than the pope's law.'' To which Tyndale replied : " If God
spare me, before many years I will cause a boy that driveth a plough to know more of the Scriptures than you do." The young priest saw that the people were living
and dying without Bible knowledge, deceived by the vain doctrines of the church of Rome, and he
quietly resolved to get the New Testament printed
in English for the use of all. This was a good and
great thought—a bold and daring thought—for a poor man to cherish ; yet, with the help of God, he was resolved to make the attempt. He was not
content to plan and arrange this important work,
but with labor and patience he sought to carry it forward. Tyndale had heard of the learning and riches of
the bishop of London, and in his simplicity he
thought he would surely aid him in the pious de- sign ; but he soon found that there was ,' no room
in my lord of London's palace to translate the word
of God, nor any safe place to do it in all England.',
[171]
At this time there lived in London a pious and
wealthy merchant, named Monmouth, who had been
taught the truth through reading the books of the reformers in Germany. He was a kind friend to Tyndale, and gave him a room in his house, where
the good priest used to sit, night and day, busy with
his pen and Latin Bible. But these were times of danger to those who truly feared Grod. Tyndale,
therefore, well supplied with money by his liberal patron, set sail over the North Sea, and went to the
great city of Hamburg. Then, removing to Cologne,
he went on in the translation and printing of the New Testament, until ten sheets were done. Two pious friends. Frith and Roye, * assisted Tyndale in the translation. There they sate, day
by day, in an old-fashioned room in an obscure
street in the city of Cologne. Pens, parchment,
and paper were before them ; one read the Latin
Bible, a second the Greek, and the third wrote down the words of the sacred text in English. In
about a year this work was finished. Tyndale then found a printer who was willing to print it. This was a service full of danger. Popish priests were
on the alert to find out any who aided the reformers
, in their work. But onward the printing went. In
this state of things, an agent of the Inquisition
found out what was going forward. He heard that
* These pious men were martyrs in the cause of truth : the first was
burned in Smithfield, July, 1553 ; the other sufiered the same dreadful death in Portugal.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[172]
a learned Englishman was in the city, and that some
printers had been heard to say that soon all England
would become Protestant. This man thought he
would find out what all this boasting meant. So
with much craft he made friends with the printers,
and invited them to his house. Here he well sup plied them with wine. In the midst of their mirth
they made known the secret, that some hundreds
of copies of the New Testament in English were in the press, which were to be secretly carried over
the seas by the merchants. The next morning the
printer's house was surrounded by officers, and the
press was seized ; but not before Tyndale, warned
of the danger, ran to the rescue of his printed
sheets, which he threw into a boat, and pushed his way from the shore. Sailing up the river Rhine
he soon came to a safer place of labor. Often had
the small ships of those days passed along this famous river with the wares and wealth of the merchants of Germany, but never did one carry so rich a treasure as was in the boat which conveyed
Tyndale and the Bible sheets to the city of Worms.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">After great pains, and cost, and toil, the last sheet
of the New Testament was completed. Fifteen hundred copies were printed—a large edition in those days ; and now the bread of life seemed pre- pared for the people of his own dear native land. English merchants took charge of the books, and
carried them to England along with articles of
[173]
commerce. The precious volume was packed in
bales, and sent to London, Norwich, and Oxford. There they were readily bought by the rich, but
though they were sold at a cheap rate, only a few
of the poor could save money enough to purchase
the holy book. Soon, however, they were found
spread over the land, and many souls rejoiced in the Grospels and Epistles, which for the first time were held in their hands, and now cherished in their hearts. Some, on receiving a portion of the
precious book, fell on their knees, and thanked God
with tears of joy for ifc. When the Roman Catholic bishop of London was
told that the printed books were coming fast to En gland, he was filled with alarm and anger. He soon
sent out orders to make a diligent search among the merchants of London and the students of Oxford,
for the forbidden work. Among the latter, some of
those who were found to have it were thrust into a dungeon, where four of them soon died. Others were made to carry fagots of wood, and with them
to kindle a fire, into which their own hands had to cast the books. As the flames rose into the air, the people were solemnly warned against the read- ing of the word of God.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">But the hope of burning the New Testament out
of the land was all in vain. The printer-priest
kept working off more copies, and they were taken
across the seas hidden in the corn which was
[174]
carried to England, at a time when great scarcity was felt. Thus bread to feed the body, and the bread of life for the soul, came in the same ships,
and were together sent through the land. Decrees were issued against the possession of the New Testament ; the seaports and ships were strict- ly watched ; the warehouses and houses were search- ed; but still the blessed books arrived. Sometimes
even Jews brought them over the seas. They came
in pedlars' packs, and in boxes of merchandise
—
now in one way, and then in another. At length, the bishop of London hit upon a cunning plan, as he vainly thought, of putting
a stop to the arrival of these books. He supposed,
that if every copy could be bought up in the place
where they were printed, the work would soon be
at an end. A London merchant was engaged to do
this business. Do your diligence to get them,''
said the bishop, and I will pay for them whatso ever they cost you.'' The merchant ordered his ship to be ready without delay, and crossing the
seas, offered to buy up all the stock in hand. The
bargain was soon made : the bishop had the books, the merchant the thanks, and Tyndale the money ! A few days after the books were safely in the charge of the bishop, a number of people were seen making their way along Cheapside and up Ludgate
Hill. It was reported that there was to be a great sentence passed, to be followed by an'execution. As
[175]
they came to St. PauFs Cross, a large fire was send- ing up clouds of smoke high above the house-tops.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">And now the bishop's ofiicers came with the poor
prisoners—the Testaments, which were cast one by
one into the flames, while a priest stood in the old stone pulpit in the open space, and loudly praised
what was being done. But when all was over, many in that crowd could not but think how wicked
and how shameful it was thus to burn God's holy
book.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">As a further proof of their anger, the priests seized Tyndale's brother, John, and one of his
[176]
friends. Then they set them on horseback, their faces turned to the tails of the horses, with bundles
of New Testaments hung around them. In this manner they were made to ride through the streets of London, and on coming to St. PauFs to throw
the books into the fire. But—how great the dismay—New Testaments were still brought to England ! The bishop soon
sent for the merchant, and cried, How is this,
sir ? Did you not promise and assure me that you
had bought them all?" Yes,', was the reply;
I bought all that then were to be had, but I per- ceive they have made more since ; and it will never be better so long as they have the letters and the
presses ; therefore it were best for your lordship to buy them too, and then you are sure." The bishop
only smiled at this answer, for he thought that, if he parted with more money, other letters and press es would be bought with it, and he should only
serve to aid the cause he wished to crush. Finding how vain were all attempts to stop the
circulation of the New Testaments, the next plan was to secure their author. Spies were sent over
to decoy him to England. Though ready to sufier anything in his heavenly Master, s work, he would
not willingly throw himself into danger. Craft,
however, brought him into the hands of his enemies. While quietly pursuing his labor beneath the
hospitable roof of an English friend, named Poyntz,
[177]
at the city of Antwerp, two wolves in sheep's
clothing came to the house—one in the disguise of
a merchant ; the other, who was a monk, was dress- ed as his servant. They pretended great interest in the doctrines of the Bible Christians, and were soon welcomed to their society. But Phillips—for that was the name of the pretended merchant—came to watch Tyndale, and, if possible to seize him.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">One day, when Poyntz went some miles distant on business, a snare was laid for the noble reform er. Phillips called on Tyndale to borrow forty shil- lings, under the excuse that he had lost his purse on the road. They then agreed to walk out to- gether. There was a long narrow passage to go
through, leading to the street. Phillips drew back,
as if politely to allow his friend to go first, when
two officers were seen standing at the door. Take
your prisoner,,' cried the pretended friend, and in a moment Tyndale was in their grasp, while Phillips hastened to receive from the priests the reward of
his treachery.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Tyndale was carried to a castle eight miles from
Brussels, and placed in a close chamber. Here he remained for some time, but his faith in Christ made the gloomy prison a place of hope and of happiness to him. His way of life was so holy, that the other prisoners said, Well, if he is not a good Christian man, we know not in whom to 16
[178]
trust." Through his teaching the jailer and his daughter were converted to God.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">But once in the power of his enemies, nothing
could save him from their wrath From that castle he did not come out till eighteen months had passed,
and then only to die as a martyr.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">At length, in October, 1536, he was condemned
as a heretic, and ordered to be burned. On being
fastened to the stake, he raised his eyes to heaven,
and cried, Lord, open the eyes of the king of England.' ' His prayer was heard ; for, before three years had passed away, king Henry of England gave
his consent to the circulation of the Bible, in the
native tongue, throughout the kingdom. Thus per- ished this noble man, one of England's best reform-
[179]
ers ; as some one has said of him, " In putting the New Testament into the hands of Englishmen, he
gave them the charter of salvation, the book of
eternal life; while his own history affords a beautiful example of its purifying and saving power, under
the blessing of the Holy Spirit."
We pass on to another stage in the history of the English Bible. King Henry the Eighth began his reign as a good friend of the pope After a while, a quarrel
arose, and he took the religious affairs of his king dom into his own hands. This gave rise to hope
in the hearts of all Bible-readers: They now ex- pected to enjoy the truth unmolested. The king's
favorite adviser, Cromwell, earl of Essex, was a
friend to the circulation of the Scriptures, and he
determined to have a complete edition printed in the English language. For this purpose he sent Cover dale, a pious and learned man, to the city of Paris,
where the best printing was then done, to superin- tend the work. Although protected by the Eng lish ambassador, the pope ordered the printers not
to proceed. The agents of the Inquisition were
sent to seize the work; yet not till Coverdale, who
before the storm burst on him had seen the gather ing clouds, had secreted a quantity of the half- printed sheets, and conveyed them privately beyond
their reach. A large portion, however, fell into
[180]
their hands : some were burned, and as much as "four great dry vats fulF, were sold to a haber- dasher to lap his caps in.'' Coverdale fled to Lon don, where the book was again put into the press, and was, without further hinderance, Fynisshed
Apryle, anno, 1539,', and soon had an extensive
sale. From its size, it was called The Great
Bible.'' The clergy were then required to provide one boke of the whole Bible of the largest volume
in English, to be set up in the churches before Christmas."
There were not many of the common people then who knew even the use of books. Any one who
could read was deemed quite a clerk," and a little crowd would gather around him, while others
sat or stood listening to the blessed truths of God.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Many persons who had the money bought the
book, though it cost a very large sum. As a proof
of the desire to possess it, a farmer, it is said, once gave a load of hay for two or three chapters of the New Testament. Many elderly people learned to read on purpose to peruse for themselves God's holy
book ; and even little children flocked among the
rest to hear portions of it read. Truly, the word
of the Lord was precious in those days."
At the death of Henry, his son, Edward the
Sixth, succeeded to the throne. He began his short reign when quite a youth ; but young as he was,
[181]
he gave promise of great devotedness to the in- terests of true religion. On his coronation day,
when he beheld the three swords used on such
occasions, he asked where the fourth was. His
lords looked up with surprise, and asked what he
meant. ,' The Bible,', he answered; that book is the sword of the Spirit, and is to be preferred be fore these swords : without that, we are nothing, we
can do nothing, we have no power.,' He loved the Bible himself ; he knew, from sweet experience,
that its truths were precious to the soul. During
his reign, which lasted only six years and a-half, the press was fully employed ; fifty editions of the Bible were issued ; and numbers of the people were
nourished by its truths. But Mary, who next sat on the English throne, was a cruel bigot. One of her first law,s was to stop the people from reading the Bible. She had
resolved to bring the whole nation back to Popery.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Then came dark days to England. Again people were called upon to choose between Bible religion
and Popery ; and at what a fearful risk men chose
the former ! It was the Bible and death ; yet there were not only men, but delicate women and chil- dren, who counted not their lives dear to them for the steadfast love they bore to the word of God.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Good John Rogers was the first of that noble band
of English martyrs who at this time sealed their attachment to the Saviour by their blood. 16*
[182]
In spite of laws and spies, many a little con- gregation used to steal away into the thick forests, to lonely fields, to cellars and barns, to read the book of life. In Fox's "Book of Martyrs," we
have a pleasing little picture of a pious company
who went to the borders of St. John's Wood, then
a wild and lonely spot on the north-west of London.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">It was the morning of May-day, and, while their neighbors were dancing around the Maypole, they were engaged in listening to the word of God. But
the constables, with staves and spears, broke upon
'
them as they sat under the trees, and arrested them. They were all committed to prison, and
soon after, thirteen were burned for hearing the word of God read, and believing its truths ! Everywhere the enemies of the Bible were on the watch. They cast into prison, or placed in the
stocks, the faithful servants of God ; many of whofti,
refusing to return to the Papal faith, were brought
to the burning pile. Thus fell three hundred of England's best subjects
—
hest, because they loved and obeyed the word of God—victims to the bigotry
of the cruel Mary.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">After an unhonored reign, Mary died, unloved,
and unlamented ) and her sister Elizabeth ascended
the throne. There was a custom in these times, on
the coronation of a prince, to release prisoners;
whep this had been done, and men long bound came
[183]
forth to light and freedom, one of Elizabeth's lords
said, There are yet four or five others to be freed."
Ah, who are they?'' she asked. Matthew, Mark,
Luke, John, and Paul,'' was the answer; "they
have been long shut up, so that they could not talk
to the common people, who are eager to see them
abroad again." Elizabeth was a Protestant, and
she was ready enough to let the good evangelists go
free. Soon the cruel laws of her sister were re- pealed, and the books went out again among the
people, who, as you may well suppose, received them
gladly. A law was made that every parish church
should be provided with a Bible, and that every parson should have a Testament for his own private use." How curious does such a law seem to us, when no minister, we should think, would be found
without a New Testament in his study. Before
the close of Elizabeth's reign, there were two hundred and sixteen editions of the Bible issued from the English press, a great many more
than were published in all the other parts of Europe.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">About one hundred years had passed away since good William Tyndale turned printer, that he might
give his translation of the New Testament to his countrymen : now we come to an important period
in the history of the English Bible. James the
First became sovereign of England at the death of
[184]
queen Elizabeth. Shortly after the festivities at- tendant upon his coronation were over, a great
council was held in the winter of 1604, at Hampton
Court palace, a few miles from London. The ob ject of this meeting was to settle some church diffi- culties which had sprung up in the last reign ; but
it is chiefly interesting to us on account of an im portant measure issuing from it—a new and able translation of the Bible; and it is the translation then ordered to be made that is used by us at the
present time, and called the authorized version."
The great work was done by many hands. Fifty- four of the most learned and distinguished divines were selected for this important business. These
were divided into six companies, to whom were as- signed diff'erent portions of the sacred volume. The
first met at Westminster, with the books of Moses,
and all the Jewish history to the second book of Kings, for their work. Dr. Andrewes, whose
learning was held in high estimation all over Europe, presided over this division. The second,
under the charge of Dr. Lively, met at Cambridge,
and they translated from Chronicles to Canticles. The third assembled at Oxford, under Dr. Harding;
their portion was from Isaiah to Malachi. The
fourth also met at Oxford, laboring upon the
Gospels, Acts, and Revelation. The fifth, at West minster, translated the Epistles. The sixth, at Cambridge, undertook the Apocrypha.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[185]
Each one of a division took the same chapter,
and having translated it in his own study, they all met together and compared their work : if they did not agree, they altered it and improved it, until the
best translation was agreed upon; it was then sent
to the other companies for examination. After the whole was completed, it was carried to London,
where some learned men from each university met
and examined it anew; and these last learned
doctors gave nine months' hard labor to the revi sion. A great deal of care and time and learning
and study were thus bestowed upon this work, which
have made the translation so valuable and enduring. In 1611, it was published as a noble folio Bible,
which has been a fountain of life to thousands and
thousands who read the English language. Blessed he God for a full, cheap, and free Bible,
It is no longer a book shut up from the people
—
written on large sheets of parchment, and unfitted
in weight and size for common use. It is not now
lying only on the shelves of college libraries, cover- ed with the dust of ages. It is not bound and seal- ed by the cruel laws and wicked devices of popes and kings. We give thanks to God that the Bible
is the birthright of every child in our land. We
remember what we owe to the bold and holy men
who set it at liberty, and gave it wings. We hold
their memories in reverence for their courage and
[186]
fidelity in the midst of toil and opposition, and with
exile and martyrdom before their eyes. We see them enduring all in hope and faith, that God's
word might go free and bless the souls of men.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">For this did many a martyr bleed,
Tlie aoble and the brave, That truth its onward course might speed, 3Ien of all lands and tongues be freed, And life eternal have. We'll prize our blessed Bible then
—
What suflfering it has cost I What tears and groans of godly men. Who won it with their mortal pain, That we might not be lost. Shall we lay it on the shelf aside, And all its blessings spurn ? No ; deep within our hearts we'll hide
Its truths, whatever may betide
—
God give us grace to learn ! What would Peter Waldo and Wyclifife and
Luther and Tyndale say, could they now visit us, and see the Holy Scriptures in the hands of all people and even little children ! With what delight
would they gaze on the poor man's twenty-five cent Bible and the Sunday scholar's eight cent Testa- ment ! And with what a shout of hallelujahs and
hosannas would they look on the two hundred dif- ferent versions of the book of God, issued by the Bible Societies, in various languages of the earth ! But blessed are our eyes, for they see and our ears, for they hear those things which many prophets
[187]
and righteous men desired to see and have not seen them, and to hear, and have not heard them.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Matt. xiii. 16, 17. We behold the Bible in the
pulpit, in the family, and in the school-house. There it is for all, and within the reach of all, and
making known the message of God's love to all who
will hear it. May we have grace to receive that message. It proclaims to us the delightful truth, God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life," John iii. 16. It makes
known to us that a sinner is justified only by faith in Christ Jesus, whose blood cleanseth us from all sin ; who is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him ; and who will not cast out any that do come. * It gives to us the promise of the Holy Spirit, whose grace and power convince us
of sin, renew our heart, comfort us in distress, and
make us meet for the joy and purity of heaven, †
Let us, then, read the Bible with diligence, faith and prayer, and with a sincere desire to obey all its commands. And if there be those who would seek
to turn us away from this blessed book, we will say wath that great and honorable man, Robert
Boyle: "The Bible is a matchless volume: it is impossible we can study it too much, or esteem it * Rom. iii. 2.5, 26 ; 1 John i. 7 ; Heb. vii. 2.:) ; John vi. 37.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">† John xvi* 7, etc.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[188]
too highly." We will declare with the learned Sir William Jooes : "The Bible contains more true sublimity, more exquisite beauty, purer morality, more important history, and finer strains both of poetry and eloquence, than could be collected from
all other books that were ever composed in any age
or nation." We will say with the poet Milton
:
There are no songs to be compared with the songs
of Zion." We will assert with that wise man, John
Locke : "The gospel has God for its author, salva- tion for its end, and truth, without any mixture of
error, for its matter." And with the renowned
John Selden we will cry, There is no book in the world upon which we can rest our souls in a dying
moment but the Bible."
And whilst have a free and full Bible, and
need not retire to the shelter of the forest to read
its sacred pages, for fear of a dungeon or a cruel death, we will think of other lands where super stition and ignorance prevail, and hope and pray
for the time when God's book shall be known
through all the earth. Oh ! send God's holy book where'er Or winds can waft, or waters bear ; Let India's sons its page revere, Let Afric's land the blessing share. , Send it to where, expanded wide, The South Sea rolls its farthest tide
;
To every island's distant shore, Mnke known the Saviour's grace and power.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[189]
Seod it to every dungeon's gloom, Send it to every poor man's room ; Nor cease the woe-worn to befriend, Nor cease the heavenly gift to send. 0 Holy Ghost ! who gave the word, With thine own truth thy light aflFord, Give thou the quickening, saving power. On all the earth thy blessings shower.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Let grace thus turn each wanderer's eye To Him who did for sinners die, And sin and sorrow hence be driven, And earth be chang'd from earth to heaven.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">17</p>
</body>
</html>