<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="dc:title" content="Historical Tales for Young Protestants" />
    <title>THE YOUTHFUL MARTYR.</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="titulo titulo2" id="ti7">THE YOUTHFUL MARTYR.</h2>
<p class="paragrafo">In the days of the young king, Edward the Sixth, a Bible was placed on a desk in every church of the
land, for the use of the people. A copy in large
print, bound in wooden boards, with curious iron
clasps, was then seen fastened by a chain to a strong
upright stand. As " the word of God was precious
in those days''—for it was costly and scarce, and
many truly loved it—those who had a small share
of learning read it aloud to those who had less abil- ity than themselves. Thus light began to spread,
when a dark cloud came over this hopeful state of
things; for queen Mary, astern papist, ascended the throne of England, and quickly ordered the removal
of the Bibles. In a few places, however, her com- mands were either not received or were not obeyed.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Whatever was the cause, it is certain that there still lay the old Bible on a stand just inside the porch
of the little chapelry at Brentwood, in Essex,
England.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">It was in the spring of the year 1555, that a
youth, named William Hunter, entered the church
to read the book he loved. He was an apprentice
[64]
to a London weaver, but was now on a visit to his native town. The lad was one of those who were
faithful to the truth, and who would rather suffer for it, than sin against it. As he stood reading the holy book, and lifting up his heart in prayer, a man
of the name of Atwell, a summoner or officer of the popish bishop, came that way, and saw him so engaged. " Why meddlest thou with the Bible V said the
officer, not a little angry that a boy should dare to open the Book of God. Knowest thou how to read ? And canst thou expound the Scriptures
The youth modestly replied, Father Atwell, I take not upon me to expound the Scriptures; but
finding the Bible here, I read it for my comfort.,' The officer then began to speak scornfully of the sacred word as a hurtful book. Say not so,,' said William, in a kind and re- spectful manner, "it is God's book, out of which
every one that hath grace may learn to know what
pleaseth God, and what is displeasing to him.', Could we not tell formerly,' ' inquired Atwell,
as well as now, how God was to be served Not so well as now,'' added William, "if we
might have his blessed word among us still, as we
have had ; and I pray God that we may have the
blessed Bible among us continually."
As Atwell could not prevail with the lad, he
cried, "I see you are one who dislikes the queen's
[65]
laws. I have heard how you* left London on that account ; but if you do not turn, you, as well as many other heretics, will broil for your opinions. " God give me grace," meekly replied William,
that I may believe his word, and confess his name,
whatever may come of it." Confess his name shouted old AtwelL "No,
no, you will go to the devil, all of you.,'
Atwell quickly left the chapel, and meeting a
priest, returned with him to where William was
reading, when the priest began to upbraid and
threaten him. The youth well knew what this meant, so he hastened to his father's house, and
taking a hasty leave of his parents fled from the town. It was a sad time when the young who loved
the Lord had to leave the homes of their early days,
and seek their dwelling and food wherever they
could find them.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">A few days after William had gone, a justice sent for the father, and ordered him to produce his
son. "What, sir,'' said the parent, would you
have me seek my son, that he may be burned
The justice was resolute ; and upon this errand the poor father was obliged to depart. He rode about
for two or three days, hoping to satisfy the justice without finding his son. The lad, however, saw
his father at a distance, and went to meet him. On
learning the danger of his parent he said he would
return, rather than place his father in any peril.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[66]
And yet how could the aged parent secure his own
safety by the surrender of his child? It was a
struggle of affection : at length he yielded, and they
went together into the town. When the evening drew on, William and his father ascended the hill that leads to the little town
of Brentwood. The cottagers bade them good cheer
as they passed them on their way ; but it was with
heavy hearts and weeping eyes that they looked for- ward to the coming morrow. They had not, how ever, to wait till the morning dawn, for during the night the young Christian was seized, and hurried
to the stocks. There he lay, till break of day, pained
in body, but happy in mind.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Early in the morning, William was taken before
a justice of the peace, who, after trying in vain to shake his faith, ordered him to be carried to the
old palace in the fields of Bethnal Green—about
sixteen miles away—where Bonner, the popish
bishop of London, then resided. When he stood in the hall of the palace, the bishop first spoke to him
gently, then sternly, and then roughly ; but still the youth would not promise to give up the Bible, and
deny its truths. " Away with him again to the
stocks,, , cried the bishop, and to the stocks William was again hurried. Two long days and nights he
there lay, without any food, except a crust of brown
bread and a small supply of water. Poor boy, what
were his thoughts in these hours of trial ? Alone,
[67]
oppressed, and with the prospect of a painful death
before him, what did he suffer? What were the
prayers and cries which then went up to God from
his heart ? Surely he had grace given to him to bear
all with humble trust and patience ; or, like Paul
and Silas, as he felt the pressure of the wood on his
legs, he may have sung praises unto God. We can- not but believe that his Saviour, who tenderly feels for his suffering disciples, gave to him to taste his choicest comfort and love. Not satisfied with this act of cruelty, his enemies
proceeded to further lengths, in the hope of sub- duing his spirit. The bishop sent illiam to one
of the London prisons, with strict orders to the
jailer to put as many iron chains upon him as he
could possibly bear. And in a dungeon he was
confined for three-quarters of a year, hoping, trust- ing, praying always.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Bishop Bonner one day thought of the Bible- loving lad in prison, and hoping that his long con- finement, together with the natural love of liberty
and home, had made him more ready to yield, sent
for him to his palace. But the spirit of the young
martyr was yet unbroken, and his trust in the gos pel as firm as before. "If you recant,', said the bishop, "I will give
you forty pounds, and set you up in business. This was a large sum of money in those days, and
the offer was very tempting, but it was at once
rejected.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[68]
"I will make you steward of my own house,"
added Bonner, in a gentle and crafty manner.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">"But, my lord," was the reply, "If you cannot persuade my conscience by Scripture, I cannot find in my heart to turn from God for the love of the world ; for I count all worldly things but loss, in comparison with the love of Christ." Will neither threats nor promises avail ? Then
away with him to the fire. When William again entered his native town, he
knew it was to endure a painful death. But yet he
knew what his Saviour had suffered for him. And
he remembered, too, the words, " Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.'' There was no prison in the little town, so the mar tyr youth was confined in an inn, and guarded by
constables. His mother heard of his return, and
with true love rushed to the place where he lay. Charity moved the hearts of the guards, and they
allowed her to see him, and to sit by his side. And
when she found him happy and constant, she bless- ed God for such a son, and the more so when he
said: "For my little pain which I shall sufi'er, Christ hath procured for me a crown of joy ; are you not glad of that, mother ?" They then knelt down and she prayed to God to strengthen her poor boy to the end. At length the morning came that young William was to die. The sherifi", justices, and priests were
duly in attendance, with executioners and guards,
[69]
while a crowd of people had come together, to the
last sad scene. As the young martyr was led along
from the inn, his father rushed forward towards him
in an agony of parental feeling. Throwing his arms
around the neck of his noble son, he said, with
flowing tears, God be with thee, son William.,' The son calmly looked for the last time on his dear parent, and replied, God be with you, father;
THE YOUTHFUL MARTYR. be of good comfort; I trust we shall meet again
where we shall rejoice together.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">There were many weeping eyes on that day in 7
[70]
the little town of Brentwood. To see one so young —a kind, gentle, pious lad—dragged through the
streets to bear the scorching flames, whose only
offence was that he loved the gospel, was a sight that touched the hardest heart, and brought tears on many a manly cheek. William, as he passed
along, saw his father's cottage, and cast a last look on his sorrowing sisters. He bade farewell to those who had been the playmates and friends of his ear liest days. He was now to suffer in the cause of
Christ, and they saw that he feared not to die. At
last, the procession came to the end of the town,
where the stake and chain and fagots were ready.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Without loss of time he was secured by the chain,
and wood was piled around. While this was being
done, a pardon was offered if he would profess him self a papist.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">"No,'' said William, resolutely, "I will not re- cant, God willing. Then turning to the people
he asked them to pray for him. " Pray for thee cried a hard-hearted justice
who was looking on, I will no more pray for thee than I would for a dog.''
"I pray Grod this may not be laid to your charge
at the last day," was William's calm reply.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">A priest, too, began to taunt him ; until a gentle- man spoke aloud, May God have mercy on his soul;" and the people mournfully added, Amen."
The fire was now lighted, and as the flames began
[71]
to rise, William, who still held in his hand a book
of Psalms, threw it into the hands of his brother,
who had followed him to the place of death. His
brother calling to him said, William, think on the
sufferings of Christ, and be not afraid." "I am not afraid,'' added the martyr. "Lord,
Lord, receive my spirit." These were his last words. The fire was lighted; the dry fagots burned briskly;
and the flames soon wrapped around his body. In
a few minutes his sufferings were at an end for ever.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">THE martyr's tree, BRENTWOOD. An old elm tree still marks the spot, near which
William Hunter yielded up his life for the truth.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[72]
Though three hundred years have passed since then,
his name is not forgotten. His soul has joined the noble army of martyrs', in heaven ; but the record
of his faith and courage will long survive on earth. Let us learn from his history:—1. The import- ance of early decision in the cause and service of
Christ; as a preservative in times of error and false religion.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">2. The need of constancy in resisting the most
tempting offers to deny our Master. Like Moses
the servant of God, let us choose rather to suffer
aflSiction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the re- proach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt.-
3. The blessing of having pious parents. The
father and mother of William could give up such a son to Christ for Christ, encouraging him, even in the prospect of death, not to renounce the truth. May your parents never be called to such a test of
love.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">4. The true character of Popery. Can that be the pure and holy religion of Jesus—the religion of love and mercy—which commits such dreadful deeds ? Christ was kind and loving to all. He came "not % to destroy men,s lives, but to save them.- When
his disciples would have used the sword, and have
called " down fire from heaven,- he rebuked them.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">How different from his gentle and merciful spirit has
been the conduct of cruel persecutors in every age !</p>

<p class="paragrafo">THE MAIDEN MARTYR.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">More than two hundred and fifty years have pass- ed since a Spaniard thus wrote of his native land : —"In Spain, many very learned, many very no ble, and many of the highest gentry, have for this
cause'' (that of the reformed faith) been led forth
to the scaffold. There is not a city, and, if one may
so speak, there is not a village, nor a hamlet, nor a
noble house in Spain, that has not had, and still has, one or more that God of his infinite mercy has
enlightened with the light of his gospel. Our ene- mies have done what they could to put out this
light, and thus they have visited with loss of pro perty, of honor, and of life, very many in Spain.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">And yet it is worthy of note, the more they threat en, scourge, throw into the galleys, imprison, or burn,
the more they multiply.'' * The good work had been begun and carried on
chiefly by the means of Bibles and tracts. Although
the Inquisition kept strict watch and strong guard,
to prevent all books from entering the land, it was
so managed, that they were carried from the border
* De Castro's Spanish ProteatantR. 7*
[74]
towns to those in the interior, in bales of goods,
and were gladly bought by all classes. And thus
the work of the Reformation went silently and
steadily on. But cloudy days indeed have come
over the country of Spain since the times of which we speak; the light has been put out, and gross darkness covers the people.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">One of the cities in which the gospel took the deepest root was Seville, a place of great wealth and
trade, and famous for its noble palaces, beautiful churches and ancient dwellings.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Among its other buildings there once stood a long and lofty range, whose gloomy walls and iron- barred windows marked it as a prison. The passen ger, as he drew nigh to it, quickened his pace, and
trembled at the thought that he might one day be
shut up in its dreary cells. This place was the
court of the Inquisition, so called, because it was
the tribunal set up to inquire into the opinions of any who were inclined to renounce the religion of
the land. This court sent forth a class of monks as its agents, known as the inquisitors, or inquirers, to search out and punish all those who did not prompt ly submit to the creed of Popery. The steps of
these inquisitors took hold on death. Few who
went into their presence returned again to their homes. Fires were kindled by them, and many
faithful servants of Christ were cast into the flames.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[75]
Others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourg ings, yea, moreover, of bonds and imprisonment."
The unhappy victim who passed the iron gate of
the Inquisition was led through several halls, one opening into the other, and each increasing in dark ness, until the last was shrouded in dismal shadows. A single window looked into the yard below, around
which were ranged the entrances to the cells, sunk
far below the surface of the ground. The descent
into these was by many winding ways, that from
their depths the cries of the prisoners might not be
heard. The sweet light and pure air of heaven
entered not there. All was black, and damp, and
terrific. In some of these vaults human bones were
spread on the ground, and the walls were covered with the names of those who had been left to perish,
unpitied and unknown. There were cruel and
wicked deeds done in those silent vaults, in the name
of the holy and merciful Saviour, which, could we know them fully, would fill our hearts with shame
and horror. The assistants to the inquisitors were called familiars; that is, those attached to the family', or order of monks. In the darkness of the night
these familiars suddenly stood before the door of a house, with their faces entirely covered with a hood,
in which were two small holes for the eyes. No
one dared to resist their power, or to assist the
object of their search in his escape. It might be
[76]
that they had got a father to inform against his
wife, or a mother against her son, or a brother
against a sister ; for all the bonds of love and duty were broken by their craft. It was enough if any
one were suspected of having read, or lent, or kept
in the house a book of the reformed faith; or had a Protestant for a friend, or had tried to console and
aid a prisoner in the cells. They had now come for the unhappy person in an hour when he was at
rest. The door must instantly be opened, and at once they seize him, and carry him away to their dungeons. There, perhaps, to lie for many months,
in awful suspense, wearied and worn, before he
knew the charge that he was called to answer. Among those who had been seized by the servants
of the Inquisition, and brought before its court, was
a young Spanish lady, named Maria de Bohorques,
the daughter of a gentleman of high condition in
Seville, and related to several noble families. Her
early youth was full of hope and promise, and her
home was cheered by every earthly comfort. But
she had been led by divine grace to give her heart
to Christ, and set her affections on. things above. Maria, when about twenty-one years of age, was
suspected of being faithless to the church of Rome.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Her tutor. Doctor Gil, who had been led to embrace
the reformed faith, was one of the most learned men
of the age. Under his care she had studied the Holy Scriptures in their original languages. A
[77]
blessing had attended the reading of the word of God; and her gifted and inquiring mind had found
the only foundation on which true religion rests. She was not long in learning that the Roman Cath olic religion is contrary to the truth of God, and
she had courage to make known what she knew and
felt.There were times when Maria thought of the
terrible Inquisition. In her hours of secret study
and prayer, she had asked of God to give her
strength, if the day of trial which had come to many should at last reach her. And now it had
come, and she stood alone and undefended before her judges.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The maiden martyr was led by the officers into a secret chamber, where at a table sat the inqui sitors, clad in dark robes, their faces scarcely to be
seen, from the position in which they sate, amid the deep gloom of the place. Before them was a small wooden cross, and a roll of paper inscribed with the charge against the prisoner. By their side were
guards and witnesses. Soft words were at first spoken. They told her
that they wished well to her soul ; that they hoped
to restore a stray sheep to the fold. As she listened
• to their address, Maria prayed in her heart, and
strength was given her to be faithful. She boldly
owned her hope in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and
refused to yield to the smooth speeches or the angry
[78]
threats of her judges. They then declared that, unless she submitted to the church of Rome, she should be tried by torture. And to awaken terror in the mind of the young Christian, there were
spread out to view the engines of cruelty used in that horrid chamber. She was pointed to the
pulley, by which a prisoner was raised to the roof
of the dungeon, with heavy weights fastened to the
feet ; to the rack, on which the body was violently • stretched ] to the fire, over which the feet of the
sufferers were hung.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The judges were concerned to know who were her
[79]
companions in the faith, and called on her to make
them known. But she gave no reply. Again they
directed her eyes to the instruments of torture, with
a threat of their severest trial. Still she stood firm ly in her resolve. The order was now given to stretch her upon the rack : and, like wolves greedy
for their prey, the officers seized her, and casting her on the frame, they secured her wrists and feet
to the cords. In a few minutes the slow turn of the wheel drew her tender limbs, as though they
would be torn from her body. In this position of agony Maria was again called on to confess; but the bold girl refused to renounce
her own faith or betray those she loved. Another
turn of the cruel wheel was made, and her joints
seemed to start from their sockets. Poor lonely one
!</p>

<p class="paragrafo">the men in whose hands she had fallen had no hearts
to feel; to them mercy was unknown. Great as was her misery, and wh,n she thought it had
reached its height, it was as though it only had be- gun. New seats of pain were reached, and in the depth of her woe she called for pity.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Perhaps many have said to themselves, If we
were called to be martyrs we would show our perse-
, cutors how to die." But how little do we know
our own weakness ! In the hour of her greatest
pain, when scarcely sensible of what she said, poor Maria owned that her sister Juana had often spoken
to her about the reformed faith, and was a secret
[80]
follower of it. This confession soon cost Juana her
life ! To the rack she was quickly brought, and on
being removed from it, she lay for a short time in the greatest agony, and then died. But Maria—what had she done ? She felt that she had been faithless to the cause she loved. She
had betrayed one dearer to her than her own life. When they took her from the wheel, they carried her to a cell. It was sweet to her to lie on that cold stone floor, and feel that the wheel was no
longer dragging her life away. Yet she had only
gained a short release at the expense of a beloved
sister. Another day of trial was at hand. Maria was soon doomed to the flames as. a heretic; but before the sentence was carried into effect, two priests were
sent to her, then another two, and again two more. They went to her cell in the hope that she might
yet yield, and profess *her faith in the church of Rome.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">It must have been an affecting sight to have be- held that poor young creature—her limbs all bruised and full of intense pain—without any human friend —reclining on the straw of her cell, while she meek ly and piously disputed with the crafty priests. She
heard their words in patience, and then calmly re- fused to receive their doctrine. Hour after hour
they tried all their art and power, but in vain. She
told them of her weakness in suffering; but yet she
[81]
looked to God for grace to bear all, and to go bold ly to the burning pile rather tban deny the truth she loved. On the morning of the 24th of September, 1559, more than one fatal stake was driven in the great square of the city of Seville. A number of the
THE GREAT SQUARE OF SEVILLE. reformed faith were to be burned that day. Among
them was Maria de Bohorques. Early in the morn ing the officers came to her cell, to carry her to the place of death, for the torture had deprived her
of the power to walk. Feeble in body, she was
8
[82]
yet strong in heart. Her inward strength was made
perfect in weakness and suffering. The Lord was
with her; she " endured, as seeing Him who is in visible." Her looks betrayed no fear. Ifc was to her
a day of victory and deliverance. Through the
flames she knew that she should pass to glory.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">There were other female Protestants burned in
Seville's great square at the same time, and Maria
sought to comfort her sister martyrs. She invited them to join with her in singing a hymn. And above
the noise and tumult of the crowd, there assembled,
their sweet voices were heard sounding the praises of the Saviour. They then cheered one another as they stood ready for death.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">It was usual at such a time, when the victims were bound to the stake, and the torch was about to be applied to the wood, for one more attempt to be made to induce the prisoner to confess. For this purpose several priests, oUt of regard to the youth,
talent and family connections of Maria, tried yet
again to bring her to renounce her faith. She was
asked to repeat the creed, and this she did in a firm voice ; but, at the same time, she explained its several parts in the Protestant sense. Finding that they gained nothing by their attempts, the officers were ordered to strangle her. This done, the pile was soon lighted, and her body was consumed.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Her released spirit passed beyond the reach of her
tormentors, there to receive the martyr's crown
[83]
from the hands of her Lord and Saviour—a crown which he purchased with his own most precious
blood, and which is the rich gift of his grace and
love. As we fondly cherish the memory of those who
"loved not their lives unto death," we may well
direct our thoughts to their happy state now in the world of glory.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Who are they, clothed in radiant white, That stand around yon golden throne
:
Their garments of celestial light. Pare with a lustre not their own ? These are the saints, who once below Walked in the path their Master trod ; Midst pain, and mockery and woe, And scorching flames, they sought their God. Through His dear might who once was slain, Firm at the burning stake they stood, And washed, from every guilty stain, Their garments in his precious blood. Therefore around the throne they stand, And in his holy temple shine ; Rich in the joy of his right hand, Robed in his righteousness divine. There they can never hunger more, Nor ask the cooling draught in vain ; For He will living waters pour. And heal from every earthly pain. In those blessed realms of endless day. The Lamb shall all their wants supply ; And God's own hand shall wipe away
The falling tear from every eye.</p>


</body>
</html>