<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="dc:title" content="Historical Tales for Young Protestants" />
    <title>THE FORFEITED CROWN.</title>
	<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
<h2 class="titulo titulo2" id="ti13">THE FORFEITED CROWN.</h2>
<p class="paragrafo">On the 6th of February, 1685, the heralds pro- claimed before the new palace at Whitehall, that James the Second had succeeded to the crown of England. Coaches, filled with noble ladies, lined the streets. Gentlemen were in groups, on foot or horseback. Flags were hung from house and steeple.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Guns were fired at the Tower ; the church bells rung merrily, the drums and trumpets sounded,
while crowds of people shouted forth their loyalty,
making one mingled din, that passed from street to
street, till the whole town was in an uproar.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">It was known that James was a Papist ; but then he had promised fair things ; and the nation hoped
that he would respect their religion and laws. "We
have the word of a king,'' said the most loyal, "and
a king will not break his word.'' " We have our
fears," said others, but we trust all will be for the
best." How James kept his promise, and what deeds were done by his command, the page of history
will tell us.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[154]
It is only three weeks after the king has come to the throne, that an aged man of calm and gentle
looks stands before a judge to answer a charge of
sedition. It is good Richard Baxter, who has long preached Christ,s gospel, and bj his writings has
led many souls to Christ. On the bench sits judge
Jeflfreys—a base, bad man, an enemy to freedom,
truth, and purity—one ever ready to carry out the designs of a tyrant king.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The prisoner has been carried from a bed of sick- ness to the court, and he asks for time to meet the charge. " I will not give him a minute to save
his life,'' cries the judge. We have had to do,'' adds he mockingly, " with other sorts of persons
;
but now we have a saint to deal with, and I know
how to deal with saints as well as sinners.'' The counsel for the prisoner rises to .appeal on his behalf ; and as he speaks of the peaceable spirit of Baxter, who is known to all as a well-wisher to the
royal family, the judge shouts aloud, He is an
old blockhead—an unthankful villain—the spring
of faction—a stubborn dog." Hang him," he
cries, or let him be whipped through the streets.*' Baxter is about to speak again, when Jeffreys
stops him. Richard ! Richard ! Dost thou think we will hear thee poison the court? Thou hast written books enough to load a cart ; and every one
is full of sedition as an egg is full of meat. Hadst
thou been whipped out of thy writing trade forty
[155]
years ago, it had been happy. I will crush you. Now, speak up ; what do you say for yourself
"I am ready to produce my writings,'' is Baxter's answer ; and my life and conduct are known to many in this nation." Fury sits in the looks of the judge, who again
loads him with reproaches, while the prisoner,
turning to those who stand by his side, points to some clergymen who have boldly appeared this day
to speak to his loyal and holy life. There is not an honest man in England," shouts JeiFreys in a
perfect rage, "but who takes thee to be a great
knave."
The mock trial is at length over; and Baxter
is sent to prison, where he must lie till happier
times shall dawn upon the land. *,When I saw," says an eye-witness, "the meek man standing before the flaming eyes and fierce looks of this judge, I thought of Paul standing
before the king. The cruel usage he received drew
plenty of tears from my eyes, as well as from
others of the spectators."
The king of England has no power to make or
set aside any law but with the consent of parlia- ment. This did not suit the proud will of James
the Second. He was resolved to favor the interests of the Roman Catholics, and issued a decree con trary to the law. This decree, or ',declaration,"
[156]
the clergy were ordered to read in the churches. The archbishop of Canterbury and six bishops hastened to the palace, and presented a petition to the king on their knees, begging him to withdraw
his command. But they were rudely spurned from
his presence. In a few days a barge was seen passing down the
river Thames, in which were the seven bishops.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">They were on their way to prison. Around them
were other boats, filled with the guards. Crowds
of people were on the banks ; some were kneeling
and begging a blessing from the prisoners as they
moved along, while the air rang with shouts. The bishops were shortly brought to trial. The
charge was that they had refused to obey the king.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">From early morning till late in the evening, the
trial went on. At night the jury were locked up
in darkness. Early the next day they came into court with the verdict of " not guilty.,' And then up
rose a shout of joy that made old Westminster hall ring again. The throng without caught the sound,
and sent it rolling along the street. A crowd of people waited to see the bishops come forth, and when
they appeared another shout, louder than ever, was
heard, which rose and fell like the breakers on the
sea-shore. All London seemed to share in the joy;
and as the bishops returned to their homes the people
fell on their knees once more; the bells rang, and
at night bonfires were lighted in every open space.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[157]
King James was at Hounslow reviewing the
troops, and, on hearing a great noise, asked, What
was the matter Nothing but the soldiers shouting for the acquittal of the bishops.', Call you that nothing he asked ; but never mind,
it will be so much the worse for them,,' he proudly
added.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">It was soon seen that the great aim of king
James was to discourage and oppress the Protes tants, and to set up the papacy as the great power
in the land. On the second Sunday after he came
to the throne he went in his state coach, with great
pomp, to the royal chapel, and ordered the doors to be set wide open while mass was performed. When
he was crowned he took care that the communion
service after a Protestant form should be omitted. Two papers in support of the doctrines of the church
of Rome were printed by his desire, and sent through
the land; while, on the other hand, the bishops
and clergy were commanded not to preach against the church of Rome. An agent was sent to the
pope, to present the homage of the king; and, in return, an ambassador came from Rome, and was
received with much honor. The highest officer in the university of Cambridge was dismissed, because he would not carry out the popish views of the king; and at Oxford many of the college tutors were deprived of their places for resisting an at- 14*
[158]
tempt to force on them a papist as their head. Monasteries were set up; and such numbers of
priests and monks flaunted through the streets in their robes, that the king boasted he had made the towns and cities of England like those in papal
lands. Nor did the king stop here. Many oflGicers of State who would not change their religion, were re- placed by strict Papists—some of whom were men
of low habits, and wholly unfit to serve the country.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">A priest and two Roman Catholic noblemen became
his chief advisers in every matter. He sought to compel his daughter, the princess Anne, to join the church of Rome ; and next to deprive his eldest daughter Mary, the wife of the prince of Orange,
of her right as heir to the throne because she was a
Protestant. At last, he carried matters to such a
point, that even the Spanish ambassador warned
him of his danger. Does not your master consult with priests asked the king. "Yes,'' was the
reply, and that is the reason why our country's
affairs go on so badly.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The heavy hand of a tyrant was felt to be on the
liberties of the country. The king levied taxes in his own name, and claimed a right to put aside the laws of the land by his own power. Four thousand
Protestant soldiers were refused their pay, and sent
to wander hungry and half-naked through the land. All who were thought to be unfriendly to his doings were fined, whipped, or sent to prison.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">[159]
The king had not sat long on his throne, when
the news was spread that the duke of Monmouth,
the king's nephew, and the .earl of Argyle, had
raised the flag of rebellion. But their plans were
rash and badly managed. They had no money, no
arms, nor any promise of support from the people.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">The king's troops soon overthrew them, and the
lives of these two noblemen were forfeited. Now was a time for the king to show mercy to the followers of the rebel chiefs. By such a course he might win the hearts of many, and turn the tide
in his favor. One of the prisoners was brought be fore him. You know it is in my power,'' said the king, to pardon you.'' Yes," said the man,
who well knew his cruel character, but it is not
in your nature." However unwise this answer was,
its truth was soon seen. Judge Jeffreys was sent with a troop of soldiers
to punish all rebels, and every one who had shown
them any favor. Among others was a pious and
aged woman, lady Alice Lisle, who was charged
with hiding two men in her house. She was not aware that they had been in arms against the king;
and the jury who tried her felt that there was no
proof of guilt. But the king's commands must be
obeyed; she must not be spared. The sentence of death was passed, and she went forth to the block
in a spirit worthy of her high Christian character. Hundreds of unhappy prisoners, more or less
[160]
guilty, were hung ia a few days, The country for
six miles between Exeter and Bristol," says one who saw the sad scene, ,' had a new and terrible
sort of sign post ] the heads of the executed were
placed in rows on poles by the road side." Other
prisoners were burned alive, and some escaped by
paying large bribes. The judges, and other persons
in power, had many that were found guilty made
over to them as gifts, that they might be sold as
slaves, or ransomed at a large price by their friends. Thousands were carried to the West India islands
to labor in slavery. Among those condemned to be
sold were twenty-seven young ladies at Taunton,
whose offence was that they had given a flag and a Bible to the duke of Monmouth. They were saved from slavery by the payment of a great sum, which was divided among the queen's maids of honor as a " Christmas box.'' For weeks Jeffreys went forward in his career of
blood. The nation looked on with horror at the
terrible doings, and deep and bitter were the
feelings that came over men's minds.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">While the people were thus borne down they
heard that James had received twenty thousand
pounds from Louis, king of France, to aid him in his designs. Then the news came that a pitiless war was raging against the Protestants of France,
many of whom escaped to England. And as they
told of their bitter trials, the people saw what they
[161]
might expect should James succeed in setting up
the Papal religion in the land. All Protestants were alike oppressed by the king. Places of worship were shut up, and ministers dragged to prison. They then met in small numbers
in private houses, late in the evening or early in the morning. There were friends who stood at the doors always on the watch to give notice of danger. They
made windows or holes in the walls between two
houses, that the preacher's voice might be heard in more places than one. They had often secret pas- sages and trap doors for their escape. In country towns and villages they went through back yards
and gardens that they might not be noticed. For
the same reason they never sang psalms, and the
minister was placed in some inward part of the house that his voice might not be heard in the
streets. But the time came when men not only whisper ed, but spoke openly of their country's wrongs.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Christian ministers, the officers of the army and
navy, and the great body of the people, groaned
under their bondage. There was no law but the
king's will; no justice or safety in the land. They
asked if it were not right in them to maintain their
religion and their laws. We have been trodden
to the ground," said many; shall we not seek to stand up as free-born Britons ?" Yes," said
others, ,' the king has stretched the bow to such a degree that some day it will snap asunder."
[162]
All eyes were turned to William, prince of Orange, who had married Mary, the eldest daughter
of James. He was a man of talent, of good cha racter, and a zealous Protestant. Near to the town of Maidenhead, on the banks of the Thames, stood a mansion, known as Hurley
house. It was a fine, old building, around which
the river flowed in its winding course, and before it spread out to view a lovely landscape. Often in
VAULT UNDER HURLEY-HOUSE. the early part of the year 1688 there met, in a gloomy vault beneath this house, several noblemen
and others. They spoke of the helpless and hope-
[163]
less state of the country under tbe reign of James,
and resolved, if he would not grant them redress,
to apply to the prince of Orange for aid. Seven
of them signed a paper, calling on the prince to come to England, and defend their cause. While the English nobles at home made ready for the conflict, the prince fitted out his ships and
collected his troops. By the end of October the Protestant east wind,', as it was called, carried the fleet towards the shores of England.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">There were many praying hearts in Britain and
Holland that God would grant success to this enter prise. Public feeling was raised to the highest
point; and soon was heard from the clifls of Torbay
a cry that the ships had reached the English coast. Seven hundred vessels bore the invading army.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">On the flag of the prince's ship were the words,
I WILL MAINTAIN THE PrOTESTANT RELIGION
AND THE LIBERTIES OF ENGLAND.',
On the 5th of November, 1688—eighty-four years after the discovery of the popish plot to blow
up the Houses of Parliament, on the same day of the month—prince William landed at Torbay amidst
the shouts of the people. An ofiicer rode at full speed, bearing the tidings to James at Whitehall. The king turned pale, a letter in his hand fell to the ground, and he stepped aside to weep. James now found what it is to be served only
from fear. In the hour of his need he was without
[164]
one who truly loved him. Nobles and gentry soon
joined the ranks of the prince of Orange; and
many to whom the king had shown favor deserted him. Opposed by his own son-in-law, betrayed by
his courtiers, with an army that could not be trust- ed, and shunned by the people, he tasted the last bitter drop in his cup of grief when he was told that
his daughter, the princess Anne, had also fled from
him. Then was wrung from him the bitter wail,
Oh, help ! my very children have forsaken me.'' Early in the morning of the 11th of December,
[165]
a common hackney coach left Whitehall. It hurried down to the river side. Two persons stepped from it into a boat awaiting them on the Thames. As they passed by Lambeth, one of them
threw a box into the water, and then landing on
the opposite shore, they both hurried along the road that led to the county of Kent. In a short time the royal chamber was found empty. The
king had fled ! He, and one of his household, were the persons who had crossed the water, and
in the box thrown into the stream was the great
seal of England.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">After passing from town to town, James got on
board a small ship, and arrived in France. The
pope's ambassador rushed out of London in the dis- guise of a footman; and judge Jeffreys was caught
in the dress of a sailor, wearing an old tarred hat,
at a low public house in Wapping. A shout of joy was raised by the people when they heard of the capture of thfe wicked man. To sav, him from
their fury, he was taken to the Tower of London,
where he soon ended his days as a prisoner.</p>

<p class="paragrafo">Thus closed the reign of James the Second. It was short, unhonored, and is a blot on the page of English history. From first to last it was without
a single event that was for the honor of the king or the happiness of his subjects. By a wise course he
might have reigned over a loyal and loving people
:
15
[166]
but he sought to overthrow the Protestant religion,
and to raise a corrupt church on its ruins. It ended
in the loss of his crown. On the flight of James, England was without a king or a ruler. The prince of Orange soon called together the peers and those gentlemen who had
been members of the last parliament. After solemn
debate, it was declared by them that the throne was vacant, that James had forfeited the crown, and that the prince and princess of Orange should be king and queen. They also agreed to a bill of
rights,, , which set forth the great principles of the
British constitution, and secured to the people
many valuable privileges, among which was a merciful and just regard to the laws of the land. The strength of the throne and the freedom of the
people of England—the home of our ancestors
—
were thus provided for. May young Protestants know how to value their civil and religious advan tages, and be grateful to God that the country in which their forefathers were born was saved, in the days of James, from the craft of the church of Rome.</p>

<p class="paragrafo"></p>


</body>
</html>